# When Searching For Meaning - Al-Hadi An-Nur

Adam, to the new school,
يعني، ما في داعي تقولهم على
رحلتك من غزة وخالك
taking you in and all this stuff, huh?
The devil school is calling. متحمسين عليك لو
يعرفوا. Hello? Hi there, is this Joe? This is Joe.
I was just looking over Adam's file. We noticed his
visa was issued, but— Actually, his immigration visa
was issued last week, but he only entered the country
two days ago. So should we expect you both after
the holiday? No, no, no, we're— we're on
our way. We should be there in, like, less than
an hour. Perfect. Yeah. And he's excited
too to meet you. We're sure Adam will
love it here.
يما، خايف؟ ما تخاف يا ماما، ما تخاف حبيبي،
ما تخافي حبيبي.
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم، الحمد لله رب
العالمين، الرحمن الرحيم.
مالك يوم الدين،
إياك نعبد وإياك نستعين.
اهدنا الصراط المستقيم.
In a hadith qudsi, Allah سبحانه وتعالى says, "يا عبادي كلكم
ضال إلا من هديته." "O my servants, all of you
are astray except those I have guided. So seek
guidance of me, and I will guide you." You were
designed to want clarity of purpose and an unambiguous
God, but you have to choose that want and prove
that you're worthy. The first deflection ever
regarding guidance came from Shaitan himself. قَالَ
رَبِّ بِمَا أَغْوَيْتَنِي He said, "My Lord, because
you misled me." He blamed Allah to excuse himself,
basically shifting his blame upwards so he doesn't
have to look inwards. And his followers, who led
others astray, will recycle the same excuse at the end
when people rush towards them in hell, and they will
say,"لَوْ هَدَانَا اللَّهُ لَهَدَيْنَاكُمْ" If Allah
would have guided us, we would have guided you. Now
Allah does say,"يَهْدِي مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيُضِلُّ مَنْ
يَشَاءُ" He guides whom He wills, and He leads astray
whom He wills. Yet when He introduced Himself to you,
He named Himself Al-Hadi, the guide, not Al-Mudill,
the misguider. You see, guidance is His gift when you
insist on turning back. Misguidance is His justice
when you insist on turning away."فَلَمَّا زَاغُوا
أَزَاغَ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَهُمْ" When they turned away,
Allah turned their hearts away. But Allah promises
that if you take responsibility for your pursuit, He
will never turn you away. How can you seek the guide
and He doesn't guide you?"وَالَّذِينَ جَاهَدُوا
فِينَا لَنَهْدِيَنَّهُمْ سُبُلَنَا" Those who strive
in Our way, We will certainly guide them to Our paths.
He already opened His door. But just like with
Al-Wahid to Al-Ahad, you have to shut the other doors
along the way before you get to His. And one
of the most vivid images the Prophet صلى الله عليه
وسلم drew was this parable of guidance. He said,
Allah سبحانه وتعالى strikes a parable of a
straight path. On both sides are walls with open doors
covered by curtains. A caller at the head of the path
says,'O people, enter the straight path
all together and do not go astray.' Whenever someone
reaches to lift a curtain on one of those side
doors, another caller from above says,'Woe to you,
don't open it. If you open it, you'll fall into it.'
The main path is Islam. The walls are the limits
of Allah. The doors on the side are the things
He made prohibited. The caller at the entrance
of the path is the Book of Allah, and the caller
from above is an admonition from Allah that He
put in the heart of every believer." Think about that
imagery. The first step into one of those paths never
feels like a big deal, but one step in and suddenly
you can't see the main road anymore. Now, Shaytan
doesn't care which door you take as long as
he can create distance between you and the guide so
that maybe you spiritually die in a spiritual dungeon.
So if you're stuck in the clutch of a sin,
the only way to get back is to call out
to Al-Hadi, the guide, to pull you out of there.
And even when you're not caught off the path, the most
frequent du'a of the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم
was,"يَا مُقَلِّبَ الْقُلُوبِ ثَبِّتْ قَلْبِي عَلَى
دِينِكَ", "O turner of hearts, make my heart firm on
your path.""وَاللَّهُ يَدْعُو إِلَى دَارِ السَّلاَمِ
وَيَهْدِي مَنْ يَشَاءُ إِلَى صِرَاطِ الْمُسْتَقِيمِ",
and all along Allah calls to the home of peace,
and He guides whom He wills to a straight path.
Al-Hadi means the guide who did not create you or
anything else without guidance."رَبُّنَا الَّذِي
أَعْطَى كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلْقَهُ ثُمَّ هَدَى", our Lord
is the one who gave everything its creation, and then
He guided it. Every atom in existence already knows
its orbit. The baby who can't even see yet still
knows how to find its mother's chest. Birds migrate
across continents without a compass, and we too know
how to make it back home to Him and to Jannah.
When Adam عليه السلام was sent to Earth, Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala said to him,"فَمَنْ تَبِعَ هُدَايَ
فَلَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ", when
guidance comes to you from Me, then whoever follows My
guidance shall have no fear, nor shall they grieve.
You begin the Qur'an with, "ٱلْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبِّ
ٱلْعَـٰلَمِينَ", all praises to Allah, the Lord of the
worlds. And then immediately your core asks, "ٱهْدِنَا
ٱلصِّرَٰطَ ٱلْمُسْتَقِيمَ", guide us to the straight
path. And then you end in Jannah saying, "ٱلْحَمْدُ
لِلَّهِ ٱلَّذِى هَدَىٰنَا لِهَـٰذَا", all praises be to
the One who guided us to this. It's like from
the first page of the Qur'an to the final stage
of Paradise, your story starts and ends with guidance
and then thanking Him for it when He gives it
to you. And if you recognize what a gift guidance
is, then you'll fall in love with the gift giver.
The word hidayah and hadiyah, which means gift,
actually share the same root in the Arabic language
because when someone gives you a gift, your heart
inclines towards them. And then if you act upon that
guidance, Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala takes you to the
next level. It becomes instinct. It's when you don't
just know what's right, but right actually feels right.
That's called rushd, direction. And Imam al-Ghazali
rahimahullah said rushd is when Allah guides you even
without signs. Basically, you no longer need the GPS
because of how often you've driven the route, or
you're already anticipating what the teacher wants
from you based upon what you know of the teacher
and previous instructions. And that's why the rightly
guided Khulafa are called al-Khulafa' ar-Rashidun
al-Mahdiyyun, because they didn't just have rightful
guidance, but they clearly knew the
directions. وَلَٰكِنَّ ٱللَّهَ حَبَّبَ إِلَيْكُمُ
الْإِيمَانَ وَزَيَّنَهُ فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ وَكَرَّهَ
إِلَيْكُمُ ٱلْكُفْرَ وَٱلْفُسُوقَ وَٱلْعِصْيَانَ ۚ أُو۟لَٰٓئِكَ هُمُ ٱلرَّٰشِدُونَ
Allah has made faith beloved to you and beautified it
in your hearts, and He has made hateful to you
disbelief and defiance and disobedience. Those people
are ar-Rashidun, those who are rightly guided. So rushd
is when Allah not only guides your mind, but He
rewires your desires. He makes iman sweet and sin
bitter. The Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم taught the
father of Imran ibn Husayn to say this du'a when
he became Muslim. He said, say,"اللَّهُمَّ أَلْهِمْنِي
رُشْدِي وَاعِذْنِي مِنْ شَرِّ نَفْسِي", "O Allah,
inspire me with my right course and protect me from the
evil of myself." Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala says about
Ibrahim عليه السلام وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا إِبْرَاهِيمَ
رُشْدَهُۥ مِن قَبْلُ وَكُنَّا بِهِۦ عَٰلِمِينَ, We gave
Ibrahim his rush earlier and we knew him. He knew
what was in Ibrahim's heart, so he made direction his
nature. And then you become more capable of leading
others as a result. Think about a murshid in Hajj
or Umrah. That's the guide who knows the place like
the back of his hand and has done it so many
times to where they can walk you through it
without missing a beat. You can read and watch as
many videos as you want, but you need someone who
has been there to walk you through it. So both
obedience and disobedience become second nature based
on where you're showing Allah that you want to go.
Then all those other doors on that path shut, and you
just pursue the one ahead. And that door is
light. "اللَّهُ نُورُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ", Allah
calls Himself the light of the heavens and the earth,
and He takes you out of ظُلُمَات, many darknesses in
the plural, إِلَى النُّورِ, into that one singular light.
There are countless ways to get lost, but there's only
one way to get home. So now, instead of just
trying to avoid alternate paths, you're also trying to
remove every veil of light so that you can see
more and more of His beauty, نُور, the light. And not
everyone gets the same light exposure. Physical
light lets the eye see physical forms. Spiritual light
lets the heart see meaning and then expands."إِذَا
دَخَلَ النُّورُ الْقَلْبَ انْفَسَحَ وَانْشَرَحَ", when
light enters the heart, it expands and opens. Think of
being in a dark room. You have no idea how
deep it is, but when Allah turns the light on
for you, you keep seeing more and more of the path
light up, and there is never enough of that depth.
You can read the Qur'an, the Book of Light,
a million times and derive benefits every single time,
as Imam al-Shafi'i rahimahullah said, because your
heart is expanding. And Imam Malik rahimahullah said,
knowledge isn't knowing many narrations. It's a light
that Allah places in the heart, and it's in accordance
with your steps towards Him. So as you walk towards
Him, the path beneath you keeps lighting accordingly.
And that's why the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم would
say, as he walked the path to prayer, "اللَّهُمَّ
اجْعَلْ فِي قَلْبِي نُورًا وَفِي لِسَانِي نُورًا وَفِي
سَمْعِي نُورًا وَفِي بَصَرِي نُورًا", "O Allah, place
light in my heart, light on my tongue, light in
my hearing, light in my sight until He got to,
وَاجْعَلْ لِي نُورًا، and make me a light." And when he
would face the darkness of hardship, صلى الله عليه
وسلم, he would say,"أَعُوذُ بِنُورِ وَجْهِكَ الَّذِي
أَشْرَقَتْ لَهُ الظُّلُمَاتُ"، I seek refuge in the
light of Your face by which all darkness is dispelled.
Whether it's the darkness of desire or despair,
Allah's light brings you out of it. So al-Hadi guides
you out of your confusion. Al-Rashid programs you to
act with clarity. An-Nur expands your heart and
perspective and path with light. And then you start to
see the evidence of God in everything around you.
Hence His final name here, al-Mubin, the evident, who
makes everything evident. Al-Mubin is clear to anyone
who's looking for His signs."قَدْ جَاءَكُمْ مِنَ
اللَّهِ نُورٌ وَكِتَابٌ مُبِينٌ", there has come to
you from Allah a light and a clear book. Al-Mubin
placed signs in every corner of creation so that you
could not forget Him. And then He filled His
revelation with proofs so that you could not deny Him.
And depending on how much light you have, you can
extract so much more from those evidences all around.
And that's why two people can read the same Ayah
of Qur'an. One of them skims and shrugs, the other
one trembles in awe. One person looks at the stars
in the sky and just shrugs. The other one looks
at it and says, "SubhanAllah." Enlightenment in Islam
is not some elitist concept. Al-Mubin, the
self-evident, makes Himself known to the illiterate
bedouin or to the super intelligent professor, but
based upon how dark it is inside their hearts. But
then how come guidance sometimes seems to come
suddenly to a person who's actually walking in the
opposite direction? It's like a button gets pressed
and then it's as if Allah suddenly turns a person
back to Him. Umar radiAllahu ta'ala anhu left home to
kill the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم, and then Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala turned him towards Him and he
never looked back. And now he's buried next to the
Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم. Think of it like Allah
flipped a switch that He already wired inside His
chest. And a man had the nerve to see him
and say, "Allah would guide the donkey of al-Khattab
before He would guide Umar." But look what happened.
And then some might say, "But on the other hand,
there are people that seem so good, humanitarians and
great friends and great people, but for some reason
they die astray." Allah knows best who is most fit
for His guidance. We see the surface, He sees the
heart. You can invite people to Islam, you can weep
for their salvation, but only al-Hadi knows what's in
the hearts. "إِنَّكَ لَا تَهْدِي مَنْ أَحْبَبْتَ", you
don't guide whom you want. And by the way, on
the Day of Judgment, we're all going to be surprised.
You'll have a scholar and a martyr ruined by hidden
intention on one hand. And then you'll see an
adulterous woman who no one expected to get into
Jannah, completely forgiven for her sins because she
gave water to a thirsty dog. Because Allah sees deep
sincerity where we only see surface level. So ask
yourself, what is Allah seeing in
your heart right now. يَا
هَادِي، guide me when my heart forgets the way.
Pull me back from every turn that leads me astray. Let
Your guidance feel closer than the doubts in my chest
and steadier than the voices that confuse me. يَا
رَشِيدُ، teach me to see truth instinctively.
Make faith beloved to me. Make righteousness feel
natural. And let sin feel heavy on my chest and hated
by my every breath. Inspire me with wisdom that
protects me even from myself. يَا نُورُ،
light every darkness I carried or carry within. Let
Your light pour into my heart and onto all
my other limbs until
You make me a light and everything I see
reminds me of You. يَا مُبِينُ، make Your signs
clear in what surrounds me and what is within me.
Reveal the lessons hidden in every trial. Let me never
lose sight of Your signs again.
Ameen. ولله الأسماء
الحسنى فادعوه بها.