# When You Feel Lost - Ar-Rabb Al-Mawla An-Nasir

يا أستاذ ما كنت بدي أعمل هيك
ماما! شبكة، شبكة! ماما، ماما! شبكة! إيش صار
يا ماما؟ ما صار إشي يا ماما. ما صار إشي...
ماما ما صار إشي بس الشبكة! Calm down, calm
down, it's a network thing. It's a network thing.
ماما سامعيتني؟ اهدا، اهدا. اهدا، اهدا حبيبي.
ماما! ما صار إشي ماما. ماما، ماما!
ماما! ماما إنت سامعيتني؟ ماما مش
سامعك، ماما! انت السبب والله انت السبب!
إنت، إنت السبب والله إنت السبب! يا ربي ماما!
ماما! وقف السيارة، وقف! وقف السيارة! What's
the matter with you? أنا السبب في إيش؟ في
إني طلعتك من الخراب اللي كنت عايش فيه وقاعد بعمل
لك مستقبلك؟ وك أنا سايب شغلي اللي هو أهم إشي في
حياتي عشان خاطرك وخاطر أمك! ما حدا طلب منك هاد الإشي
يا جماعة؟ ولا أنا بدي إياك؟ Come back!
تعال! آدم! Where are you going?
تعال! آدم! Adam!
Do you ever want to talk to your mother again
or you want to run away?
Good boy. بطل. آه بطل، بس على الأقل ما بسيب
أهلي عشان أروح أصير زي الأجانب، ولا مش فاهمني أحكي
لك إياها بالإنجليزي يعني؟ لا يا حبيبي، بقعد أنا وأمك
ونستنى قذيفة تيجي تاخذنا. شو مالك؟
شو قصدك يعني؟ إيش، إيش قصدك يعني؟ إيش قصدك؟
شو شو يعني شو قصدك انت هيك بتحكي؟
اهدأ، اهدأ. شو قصدك يعني هيك بتحكي معي؟
It's our signal.
إيه ده؟ إيه ده؟ كانت المشكلة من عنا. It's
our signal. I didn't mean it.
أنا عارف إنك خايف عليها.
والله أنا كمان. بس صدقني،
أمك غير عن كل الناس. أمك أكثر حدا
متفائل شفته في حياتي.
لما كنا صغار ما كانتش تشوف الحرب على إنها لعنة.
والغريب إنها... إنه كان معها حق.
وأنا دليل على هالحكي.
الحرب كانت فرصتي
علشان... أصير شي.
Your mother is giving you a huge chance. But you
have to accept that you can't be a child anymore.
This country will allow you to dream for
once in your life.
And if you work hard for it, that dream
can come true.
Your mother saved my life once.
She's just trying to save yours.
You don't only want to be His friend. You want
to belong to Him. Because friendship brings comfort,
but servitude brings purpose. And servitude to Allah
is not humiliation. It's actually the purest kind of
honor. Allah is Ar-Rabb, the Master who raises. If
you look at the Qur'an, it begins with"الحمد لله رب
العالمين", and then it ends with"قل أعوذ برب الفلق
وقل أعوذ برب الناس". From opening to closing, Allah
frames your life through His Lordship. Everything
starts with praise for the Rabb of the worlds, and
then it ends by seeking refuge in the Rabb of every
creation. He is رب العالمين، Lord of all that exists,
Master of the world in the grandest sense.
But He's also your personal Lord. And when Allah
Subhanahu wa Ta'ala says, "ذكر رحمت ربك", a mention of
the mercy of your Lord to His slave Zakariyah, He
didn't say ربه or ربه, He said ربك, your
Lord, so that you wouldn't turn Him into a Lord
of the past who only was close to a select
few in history. Throughout the Qur'an, the du'as that
you hear are ربي and ربنا. Notice you don't
hear إلهي because the worshipper seeks an إله, but
the beloved servant longs for his Rabb. He is the
Rabb of all places and all times and of you
throughout your entire existence. And the Day of
Judgment will either be a reunion with a loving Lord
or the moment when false masters disown the followers
who worship them and stand alone in front of a
Lord that they ran away from. But as Ibn al-Qayyim
Rahimahullah said, "Everything you fear in life, you
run away from. But with Allah, you run to
Him. "فَفِرُّوا إِلَى اللَّهِ", flee to Allah even if
you fear Him. As the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم
used to say, "اللَّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِرِضَاكَ مِنْ سَخَطِكَ", "O Allah,
I seek refuge in Your pleasure from Your
anger." "وَبِمُعَافَاتِكَ مِنْ عُقُوبَتِكَ", and in
Your pardon from Your punishment." "وَأَعُوذُ
بِكَ مِنْكَ", and I seek refuge in You from You. This
is the language of someone who knows that refuge is
only found in the very one he fears to disappoint.
The name Rabb means you don't have a cold master,
but you have a loving Lord involved in your life,
arranging your growth, helping you realize your
bigger purpose, and giving meaning to every small act
that you do. Rabb carries the meaning of تربية، which
is to nurture something, to grow something, and to
bring something to its potential. And the root of the
verb refers to a farmer planting a plant. And think
of that image of the farmer measuring the soil and
then measuring the water and then shielding that
plant from harsh wind and constantly giving it its
nutrients and exposing it to sunlight so that it
doesn't just survive, but it bears its maximum
potential in terms of fruit. And then think of a
murbi who mentors you and who gives you the right
advice that you need to refine your character. And
then he checks on you, or she checks on you
constantly to make sure that you're getting to where
you need to be. Or a mentor who you invite
to critique you so that you can be the best
version of yourself. Think of a mother as a murbiya
who calibrates the sleep and diet of the child and
then teaches her child basic manners and letters and
numbers and knows when to be firm and knows when
to be soft, knows not to break the child, but
to build the child. You see, your Rabb commands
everything outside of you, from nature to the people
around you to everything that goes inside of you as
well. And then He grows you to your potential. And
only He has that full command over you. So the
Prophet ﷺ said, "لا يَقُولَنَّ أَحَدُكُمْ عَبْدِي
فَكُلُّكُمْ عَبِيدُ اللَّهِ," "Don't call anyone my slave, for
all of you are the slaves of Allah." And let
not the servant say 'Rabbi' to anyone, but let him
say 'Sayyidi,' which could mean my master or my leader.
'Mawla' and 'Sayyid' can describe people, especially the
Prophet ﷺ, but 'Rabb' exclusively
belongs to Allah ﷻ. And that's why
when سلمان الفارسي رضي الله تعالى عنه was describing
how he was sold from slave owner to slave owner
before being freed by the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم,
he said, "I went من رب إلى رب, from one master
to another." And Abu Hurairah explained that he
didn't yet know that we don't use that word
for anyone but Allah because you're not slaves in the
holistic sense of the word to anyone but He who
is the only master in the true sense of the word.
But the image of a master who has complete
control over you shouldn't cause you despair or make
you feel restricted. He's a loving Lord who wants to
grow you, not break you. And He's a Lord who
laughs when you think you have no one to save
right before He actually does. The Prophet صلى
الله عليه وسلم said, "ضحك ربنا من قنوط عباده", "Our
Lord laughs at the despair of His servants while
relief is near." And the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم
was asked, "Wait a minute, does the Lord laugh?" And
the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم said,"Yes." And the
man replied, "Then how can we be deprived of goodness
by a Lord who laughs?" Now someone might think, why
would Allah laugh at the despair of the servant? To
Allah belongs the highest example. But I want you to
imagine a child walking in the mall who loses sight
of his mother. In that instant, his whole world
crashes and he cries uncontrollably as if he can't
breathe. Then his mother appears laughing softly, not
in mockery, but in mercy, almost to say, "Did you
really think that I was going to leave you? I'm right
here." We're that child. We despair when we can't see
our Lord's plan at times, though He never leaves us.
And to Allah belongs the highest example. So He
laughs not to mock you, but because you don't know
what mercy awaits you. He's a different type of
Master. And servitude to Him is of the type that
liberates you. And that's why ربعي بن عامر رضي الله
تعالى عنه, when he entered into the palace of رستم,
he says in the face of that pompous ruler, "إن
الله ابتعثنا لنخرج العباد من عبادة العباد إلى عبادة
رب العباد," "We are a people who were sent to take
people from being slaves to other slaves to being
slaves to the Lord of all slaves." "ومن
ضيق الدنيا إلى سعة الدنيا والآخرة," "And from the
suffocation of this world to the vastness of this
life and the next." "ومن جور الأديان إلى عدل الإسلام,"
"And from the oppression of all other ways to the
justice of Islam." Slavery to Allah is freedom from
everything else. And that's why Allah says, even the
Messiah and the angels nearest to Allah are not too
proud to be His عباد، to be His slaves. And every
time you testify, "أشهد أن محمداً عبده ورسوله"،
"I bear witness that Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم is
His slave and messenger," you're not insulting the
Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم, you're actually praising
him. And when you trust His care as your رب،
He protects you from all other than Him. Hence the
name المولى، the Master who's on our side. Now the
word مولى can be applied to many different people. As
Ibn al-Athir Rahimahullah mentions, it can refer to
the Lord, to an ally, the lover, the freed slave,
and so many more categories. But with Allah Subhanahu
wa Ta'ala, it has a very specific connotation. مولى
is close in meaning to ولي، but it usually appears
in contrast to those who have no other protector. So
when Allah Subhanahu wa Ta'ala says, "ذلك
بأن الله مولى الذين آمنوا وأن الكافرين لا مولى لهم",
that is because Allah is the protector of those who
believe, while the disbelievers have no protector. At
Uhud, do you remember when Umar رضي الله تعالى عنه,
replied to Abu Sufyan after the battle and he
said, "الله مولانا ولا مولى لكم"، "Allah is our مولى
and you have no مولى." And this is what the people
of Gaza have been saying to their enemies all along.
The مولى is the one who is exclusively on
the side of the believers."أنت مولانا فانصرنا على
القوم الكافرين","You are our protector. So grant us
victory over a disbelieving people." So think of it
this way. When you need help, you look first to
whoever is closest and most capable. The Mawla says,
"I've got you in a way that no one else can."
So when Az-Zubayr, radiyallahu 'anhu, was dying
and he feared these massive debts he'd leave behind,
he told his son Abdullah, "To pay off as much
as you can. And if you struggle to pay off
what I owe, استعن بمولاي, then seek help from my
Mawla." So Abdullah said, "By Allah, I could not
understand what he meant until I asked him,'O my
father, who is your Mawla?' And he said, 'Allahu
Mawlay.'" So he said, "After he died, whenever I
struggled to pay his debts, I would make this du'a
and I would say, 'Ya Mawla Az-Zubayr,' 'O Master of
Az-Zubayr, pay his debts on his behalf.' And Allah
would open a new door for me." And it got
to the point where so much money came back to his
estate that where he died leaving nothing, his
estate was full of wealth."نعم المولى ونعم النصير",
what an excellent protector he is and what
an excellent helper he is, which takes us to this
name. When you find comfort in Him being on your
side, He shows you His power to help. Allah is
النصير, the helper who loves to aid you. Now what's
the difference between مولى and نصير? Because they
come right next to each other and they seem very
similar. Think of المولى as the one who is with
you even in defeat and النصير as the one who
guarantees you victory at the end. النصير speaks to
decisive outcomes and promised victory. And when an
oppressed person calls out, Allah Subhanahu wa Ta'ala
answers,"والله لأنصرنك ولو بعد حين", "I swear
I will deliver for you even after some time."
But He is المولى with you throughout that process,
النصير to give you the promised outcome. So does
Allah Subhanahu wa Ta'ala give نصر only to those whom
He loves? Sometimes Allah gives نصر because of a
circumstance, not because of the person. So for
example, when the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم, says,
دعوة المظلوم, the prayer of the oppressed, has no
حجاب between it and Allah, even if the one making
the prayer is a disbeliever. Allah Subhanahu wa
Ta'ala is not granting نصر to that person because He
loves them, but because He hates injustice. But when
He is both your مولى and your نصير, His help
comes to you both from His love as well as
His sense of justice. So think of when نوح عليه
So think of when Nuh (AS) said, "رَبِّ إِنِّي مَغْلُوبٌ فَانتَصِرْ," "O my Lord, I
am overpowered. So help me." And help came in forms
he never imagined. Sometimes Allah Subhanahu wa
Ta'ala changes the world around you and sometimes He
changes you from within. But His help always arrives
in the way that saves you best. And when you're
obeying your Rabb and you're loving your Mawla and
you're trusting your Nasir, you submit to His perfect
authority and you see others as legitimate only to
the extent that He recognizes them. And that's when
you know Him as as-Sayyid, the Master of all masters.
Now a sayyid could also be a person. And unlike
Mawla, which has many connotations in the human sense,
sayyid always comes with some connotation of leadership
or honor. We call the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم,
Sayyiduna Muhammad. Umar (RA) said, "Abu Bakr
is our sayyid and he freed our sayyid," meaning Bilal.
And the Prophet (SAW) held al-Hasan
(RA), and he said, "This son of mine
is a sayyid." Yet interestingly enough, even with the
Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم, when a delegation came to
him and said, "You are our sayyid," he said, "السيد الله
تبارك وتعالى," as-Sayyid, the sayyid, is Allah Subhanahu wa
Ta'ala. And he cautioned them, "Say what you will or
part of it, but do not let Shaytan carry you
beyond bounds." Now again, perhaps the Prophet
صلى الله عليه وسلم, recognized that maybe they meant
something beyond when they said that to him. Among
people, Sayyid means leader, but for Allah it means
unmatched mastery. Every leader leads only by the
light that he lends. And every ruler rules only
within His kingdom. Knowing that truth frees you from
fearing people or wanting too much from them because
you see that all commands ultimately returns to Him.
Yahya ibn Mu'adh رحمه الله said, "The slave
estranges himself from his master through his own
sin. Yet he never leaves his doorstep knowing that a
slave's honor lies only in the shade of his master."
Then he recited,"قرة عيني لا بد لي منك وإن
أوحش بيني وبينك الزلل قرة عيني أنا الغريق
فخذ كف غريق عليك يتكل, "The coolness of my eyes,
I cannot live without you, even though my slips have
estranged me from you. The coolness of my eyes, I
am the one that's drowning. So grasp the hand of a
drowning man who depends only on you." Al-Muzani
رحمه الله used to say, "Who is like you, O child
of Adam? Whenever you wish, you purify yourself and
whisper to your Lord with no veil and no interpreter.
But who is like you, O our Lord? You look
at this slave of yours with a mercy and majesty
that does not alienate, but only draws near."
يا رب, "Raise me the way You raise every seed
from the soil.
Shape my growth with all You continue to give.
Let every season You place me in become a lesson
in Your care.
يا مولى, be my protector when I have no one
else to stand up for me. Take charge of my
affairs when I lose control of them.
Hold me near when fear surrounds me and make
Your guardianship always enough for me. يا
نصير, help me in every battle I cannot see.
Grant me triumph without arrogance and victory only
in a way that brings me closer to You.
يا سيد, teach my heart that true honor is to
only serve You.
Let my dignity be in humility, my leadership in
obedience, and my freedom in
surrender." وَلِلَّهِ الْأَسْمَاءُ
الْحُسْنَىٰ فَادْعُوهُ
بِهَا.