# Why Prayers Feel Unheard - As-Sami Al-Qarib Al-Mujib

Hey, you're getting all comfy, huh? I'm
Joe. This is my wife, Alia. Hi, Yusuf.
How are you feeling? Um, uh, better,
thank you. I'm glad to hear.
Please have a seat. This is—I mean, this
is very kind of you guys, but we should
really get going. Uh, you can. Uh, not in
your condition. Besides, the buses stopped
driving an hour ago. And I made Adam's favorite
dessert. His favorite dessert? Mm-hmm. Uh, I'm
sorry, but no phones at the dinner table. Please put
it there. So, Adam, are you excited about the
school? Who's excited about going to boarding
school? Rahim. Sorry, uh—sorry, I didn't want to
overstep. No, it's—it's—it's not a problem.
I know boarding school is not ideal for him, but I
thought maybe he'll learn some structure
and work takes all
my time, so I just...
it being better.
يا صُوتِ هِيهاتِ
آدم نور حياتي.
يُومِ ال
الجيت يا آدم،
يُومِ ال جِيت لَحَياتي
يُبَدِّلُ شَيْبَةَ الْحَيَاةِ
وَبَيَاضَ الْعَيْنِ
Before your lips even moved, He was already
listening. Before you even formed the words, He
already knew what your heart was trying to say. You
don't summon Him by your voice because He was never
absent to begin with, and you don't wait for Him
to arrive because He's already been anticipating
your return. وَإِذَا سَأَلَكَ عِبَادِي عَنِّي فَإِنِّي قَرِيبٌ
And when My servants ask you about Me, I
am close. And notice how Allah says it. In every
other question the people ask the Prophet ﷺ,
the Qur'an says, "Say," قُلْ, but here
there is no "قُلْ," no "say," just فَإِنِّي قَرِيبٌ, I am close,
as Allah Himself intervenes to answer directly
because He already knew you were going to ask the
question, and He wants you to know that He answers
without intervention or hesitation. He is As-Sami',
the All-Hearing, who hears everyone and everything
all at the same time. Hearing is not an act
of effort for Him, but an attribute of His essence.
Imagine a bunch of people talking at the same time
around you. You wouldn't be able to understand any
of them. As-Sami' hears every voice, every
decibel, and even what hasn't become sound yet.
يعلم السر وأخفى He hears the secret and what is even
more hidden. He hears what is more silent than
silence itself. So when the Prophet ﷺ
وسلم saw someone shouting in his dua, he said, إنكم
لا تدعون أصماً ولا غائباً, you are not calling upon
one who is deaf or absent. And when you make
that silent dua in the dark, that's proof of faith
because you wouldn't speak so silently unless you
were sure that a Lord was there to hear you.
الدعاء هو العبادة, dua is the essence of worship
because it manifests all understandings of both Him
and you. And He doesn't just hear your words. He
hears your heart and what you actually want, and He
acts upon it in a way that goes far beyond
what you could ever want. Think about Zakariya عليه
السلام standing alone in prayer while the world
slept in the corner of Masjid Al-Aqsa. إذ نادى ربه
نداءً خفياً, when he called upon his Lord with a
secret call. He didn't shout, but his heart shouted
because in Arabic, nida' means to raise your voice.
So when Allah says نداءً خفياً, a quiet shout, it
almost sounds contradictory, but the cry of the soul
doesn't need sound. Qatadah رحمه الله said,
أي سراً وإن الله يعلم القلب النقي ويسمع الصوت الخفي,
He called upon His Lord secretly, and verily
Allah knows the pure heart, and He hears the hidden
voice. And some of the Salaf said that Zakariya rose
at night while his companions slept, and he said,
يَا رَبِّ يَا رَبِّ, until Allah said, لَبَّيْكَ لَبَّيْكَ,
"Here I am, here I am." Who are we for
Him to say to us, "لَبَّيْكَ"? Just like we
don't deserve to be forgiven on merit or loved by
deed, we don't deserve to be heard because we're
humans. But just as He heard Zakariya's silent cry
in the corner of Masjid Al-Aqsa, He hears you in
the corner of your room. When you say in prayer,
سمع الله لمن حمده, Allah hears the one who praises
Him. It's an affirmation that the quiet dhikr you
made in ruku' and the quiet du'as you're about to
make in sujud are all heard by Him. And you
immediately say directly after, رَبَّنَا وَلَكَ الْحَمْدُ, "Our
Lord, to You belongs all praise." And knowing the
One who hears all changes how you speak about
everything. It makes you weigh your words and talk
about Him and even to Him constantly to where you
start making quiet dhikr and du'a between your
breaths. And He doesn't hear like one who is distant
because He's also Al-Qarib, the One who is always
close. Before Zakariya عليه السلام, could even
finish his du'a, Allah cut him off with the response,
يَا زَكَرِيَّا إِنَّا نُبَشِّرُكَ بِغُلَامٍ اسْمُهُ يَحْيَىٰ,
"I heard you, and here's the child you were
asking for, already named and shaped with the most
beautiful qualities." Remember, that was
ذِكْرُ رَحْمَتِ رَبِّكَ عَبْدَهُ زَكَرِيَّا, "Your Lord's mercy to His slave
Zakariya." And Allah says, إِنَّ رَحْمَتَ اللَّهِ قَرِيبٌ مِّنَ
المحسنين, "His mercy is close to all the good
doers." أَلَا إِنَّ نَصْرَ اللَّهِ قَرِيبٌ, "Verily the help
of Allah is close." But greater than His mercy being
close or His help being close is that He Himself
is close. But that nearness can also be scary if
you've been running away from Him. Allah says,
ولقد خلقنا الإنسان ونعلم ما توسوس به نفسه
وَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ حَبْلِ الْوَرِيدِ, "Verily we created
man and we know what his soul whispers to him,
and we are closer to him than his jugular vein."
He hears evil whispers and He hears righteous
whispers. There is a closeness that can confront you
or a closeness that can comfort you depending on
what you are saying under your breath or even in
your heart. He is close to everyone in His
awareness, but He's close to the believer with His
awareness and His mercy. And think of how that
awareness and mercy tie generations of belief
together. Before Zakariya (AS) asked for a
son and said, إنك سميع الدعاء,"Indeed you are the
hearer of supplication." His forefather Ibrahim
عليه السلام, said the exact same thing. إن ربي لسميع
الدعاء, "My Lord is surely the hearer of
supplication." The father of Bani Isra'il called for
a son so that faith could begin to take root
in his descendants. Then one of the last prophets of
Bani Isra'il called for a son so that faith would
not end in this dunya without a descendant to carry
on the message. Both asked not out of desperation
for lineage, but out of love for Al-Wadud. And both
knew that As-Sami' already heard what was in their
hearts before their lips knew what to say. But Allah
turned up the volume and recorded their du'as in His
final revelation so that we all read them and call
upon our Rabb the same way they did. But are
you willing to sacrifice what they did? Because that
closeness demands a step. Think of the word qurbani,
sacrifice, which comes from the word qurb,
closeness. Ibrahim عليه السلام, was willing to lay
down his son to get closer. Are you willing to lay
down your time, your pride, your habits, even
your comfort? Each act of sacrifice is a step of
closeness because Al-Qareeb isn't a concept that you
talk about. He's a closeness that you live.
Closeness to Allah is the greatest gift before you
even ask Him for anything. Remember when Fir'aun
once told his magicians that his greatest favor to
them was, "I'll make you from my close ones,"
المقربين, but Asiya عليها السلام, his own wife
looked beyond his throne and to the Lord of the
Mighty Throne and said, رب ابن لي عندك بيتا في
الجنة, "My Lord, build for me with You a house
in Paradise." She didn't just want Jannah. She
wanted it with Him. That's qurb. That's what it
means to seek closeness. And then those same
magicians that once longed for the closeness of
Fir'aun fell into sujood to Allah and were martyred
here only to have their souls ascend to the throne
of Allah, just like Asiya. So then what's the fruit
of all this in terms of du'as actually being
answered? Remember the Hadith Qudsi where Allah
talks about His wali and He says, "My servant keeps
coming closer to Me with his obligations and then
his voluntary good deeds until I love him, and when
I love him, I become the hearing with which he
hears, his sight with which he sees, his hand with
which he grasps, and his foot with which he walks."
That's the qurb part. That's the closeness. But then
ولئن سألني لأعطينه, "If he asks Me, I will surely
answer him." وَلَئِن سَأَلَنِي لَأُعْطِيَنَّهُ "And if he seeks
refuge in me, then I will surely grant it to him."
وَإِذَا سَأَلَكَ عِبَادِي عَنِّي فَإِنِّي قَرِيبٌ ۖ أُجِيبُ دَعْوَةَ
الدَّاعِ إِذَا دَعَانِ ۖ Notice Allah says, "You ask and He's
close," and then He says,"You ask and He
answers." أَمَّن يُجِيبُ الْمُضْطَرَّ إِذَا دَعَاهُ وَيَكْشِفُ السُّوءَ
"Who is the One who answers the caller in
distress and removes the evil?" But qurb comes
before ijaba. Salih عليه السلام captured it
perfectly when he said, إِنَّ رَبِّي قَرِيبٌ مُّجِيبٌ "Indeed
my Lord is close and responsive." The scholars
explain that al-Qarib comes before al-Mujib,
just like at-Tawwab comes before ar-Rahim.
فَتَابَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ لِيَتُوبُوا ۚ "So just like He turns to
you so you can turn to Him, He brings you
close to Him so that He can answer you in
the best way." Imam Ahmad رحمه الله, was once
asked,"Ya Imam, what's the distance between us and
the throne of Allah?" He said, "A sincere prayer
from a pure heart. Sometimes al-Mujib answers by
protecting you from evil instead, or with exactly
what you asked for, or better. And sometimes He
changes you before He changes your circumstances
because that was better for you all along." Al-Imam
al-Ghazali رحمه الله said, "He knows the needs of
the needy before they ask, and He answers the
unspoken prayers with the wisdom of His timing." So
if someone says, "If He already knows, then what's
the point of du'a?" Because du'a isn't about informing
Him. It's about transforming you. And that only
happens through bringing you closer to Him. Every
time you ask, you move closer. Every time you fall
into sujud and cry your heart out, He fills your
heart with Him before He fills your hands with what
you asked Him for. واسجد واقترب, "Prostrate
and come closer." And don't ever think getting close
to anyone else in this world will get you a
better share of anything this world has to offer.
طاووس رحمه الله once said to 'Ata, "إياك
أن تطلب حوائجك من أغلق دونك بابه وعليك بمن
بابه مفتوح إلى يوم القيامة," أمرك أن تسأله
ووعدك أن يجيبك." Beware of seeking your needs from
someone who shuts his door in your face. Turn
instead to the One whose door is open until the day
of judgment. He commanded you to ask Him, and
then He promised to answer you. He is as-Sami'
who heard you before you spoke, al-Qarib who came
close before you even moved, and al-Mujib who
answered before you even finished asking. The
Prophet ﷺ said, أدعو إلى الله وحده
ادْعُوا إِلَى اللَّهِ وَحْدَهُ, "I call to Allah alone." The One who, if harm
touches you and you call upon Him, removes it
from you. The One who, if you are lost in
a barren land and call upon Him, guides you back.
The One who, if drought afflicts you and you call
upon Him, brings forth growth for you. So ask. Ask
for everything, for what you know you need and what
you don't know you need. But don't ask so much
for possessions and forget that the greatest
possession He can give you is a position
near to Him. Ya Sami', you hear
every sound before it's spoken and every
silence before it finds words. Inspire
in me the words that are pleasing to you.
Make sincere the dua that I utter between breaths
and even the ones I make loud alongside others.
Let me never doubt that you are listening
and never tire of my calling. Ya Qarib,
you are nearer than every thought I hide.
Let me feel your nearness in the stillness of my
prayer. Let the clarity and comfort of your
closeness cut through all the noise outside
and forgive me for what should have never
made it inside. Ya Mujib, answer not
only what I ask, but what I mean.
Give me what I would have prayed for if I
knew what was best for me. When I raise my
hands to you, fill them only with what draws me
closer to you and protect me from ever believing
that an answer is not possible or questioning
you. وَلِلَّهِ ٱلْأَسْمَآءُ
ٱلْحُسْنَىٰ فَٱدْعُوهُ
بِهَا ۖ