# When You Need to Be Seen - Al-Basir Ash-Shahid Ar-Raqib

I bought you some tea. So what do you call it out here?
Oh, thanks, Rahim.
Um, Raheem, I—I was wondering if it's
okay with you and Nadia? No problem.
Adam can stay with us. Go to your meeting, and you
can come back until you're done.
Are you sure? بالطبع. Really.
Actually, we've grown very fond of Adam.
He reminds us of our daughter, Sandra.
Oh, I didn't know you had
Excuse me.
What's wrong? It's just another investor
pulled out. Look, I may not understand
what you're doing, but at the end of the day,
it's—it's just work, brother.
It's not worth it, you know, tearing
yourself apart for that.
Things have a way of settling down.
They always do.
Except that they won't. Why do you say
that? Because I'm a cursed man. Cursed
with war, cursed with my grief, and cursed
with my roots.
There may be people who are less fortunate than
others, but it doesn't mean that they're cursed.
It's just the nature of life. Life?
What kind of life is that? You have no
idea what I've been through to get to where
I am right now, despite being a Palestinian,
and then just watch the whole thing just collapse
in seconds.
I don't know about the journey, but I
have an idea about how it feels to be,
you know, judged by your name?
Your skin color?
Come on, man. I'm Sudanese.
I'm a Black African. People don't even
look long enough to decide if we are human
or not. We are a headline, a stereotype,
you know? That's it. But الله sees
more in us than that. Really?
You're bringing الله into this? Where
was الله when this kid was torn away
from his mother?
Where was he when your people suffered?
And where was he when I had to bury my
own parents along with my entire childhood? Where
was he, Rahim? She's dead. Who?
My daughter, Sandra. You asked about her.
She passed away. I didn't—
I—I don't know why it happened.
I have no
answer. You know?
I have no answer to make it hurt less.
But I do know it was—it wasn't for nothing.
I was going through a lot. And I was
given a lot, too.
Don't get me wrong. But—
the only thing
that never left
me was him.
What's the point? I don't know.
But the answer you're trying to get
is—is right inside of you, you know? You—you
haven't looked at
the right part of yourself. The part
that you—that you're running from.
You know, I used to call myself Way.
I thought if I trimmed my name, I could
fit in better.
I thought if I erased where I'm from, I—I could
be a new version of myself.
But remembering—you know, remembering
looking at my daughter, you know,
Sandra, and—and how proud she was
of who Allah made her.
It bugs the deen in me.
I was ashamed of myself.
I hated myself, for real.
For all the time wasted, pretending.
I wish she was still here.
But she gave me something back.
She taught me that, you know, it doesn't
have to be a label, you know?
Not an apology or a
threat. Just Laym.
You know, proud
of myself. For
finally standing still.
It can feel like you're invisible and that no one
seems to see your pain. وَاصْبِرْ لِحُكْمِ رَبِّكَ
فَإِنَّكَ بِأَعْيُنِنَا But you are truly under
our watchful eyes. You are carried in our sight,
not just caught by our sight. In a world where
cameras capture your face but not your heart, His
gaze is the only one that heals instead of hunts.
People look for your low lights or maybe even your
highlight reel. Al-Basir looks at the hidden real,
The parts that you edit out even from yourself.
Al-Basir is the All-Seeing who sees what no one
else sees. Anyone else could be staring at
you right now and miss something even on the
surface. And when someone says, "I want to feel
seen," what they mean is they want to feel seen
and understood. Al-Basir sees even through layers
of darkness that no eye can penetrate. Think about
how dark the ocean is and the kind of night
vision you would need just to make out the surface
of it. And then remember the narration from Ibn
Mas'ud (RA) about Yunus (AS).
Allah heard him and saw him فِي ظُلْمَةِ الليلِ
وَظُلْمَةِ البحرِ وَظُلْمَةِ بَطْنِ الحوتِ in the
darkness of the night, in the darkness of the sea,
in the darkness of the belly of the whale. Your
heart can feel like that dark ocean sometimes. And
Al-Basir can see right through every single layer.
And then when you stand in the night and no
one else knows you're awake, He says,
الَّذِي يَرَاكَ حِينَ تَقُومُ وَتَقَلُّبَكَ فِي
السَّاجِدِينَ The one who sees you when you rise
and your circulation amongst those who prostrate.
Between the two states, it's as if He's
saying,"You are never unseen. Not in your tears,
not in your thoughts, not in your tests." So when
the world overlooks you and you start to feel
invisible, remember that you are moving beneath
His gaze and guarded by His sight. And Ihsan is
أَنْ تَعْبُدَ اللَّهَ كَأَنَّكَ تَرَاهُ
فَإِنْ لَمْ تَكُنْ تَرَاهُ فَإِنَّهُ يَرَاكَ You
worship Him as if you can see Him. And when
you can't, you know He sees you. Your greatest
comfort in this world becomes worshiping Him while
knowing He sees you. And your greatest desire of
the hereafter becomes seeing Him while knowing
He's pleased with you. And just as Al-Basir is
seeing your reality, He grants you basirah, an
inner sight that sees His reality through
everything else. He sees through layers of
darkness over your pain. You see through layers of
deception that try to take you away from Him. You
stop being deceived by appearances and you start
seeing things as they truly are. But will He tell
the world what He saw that no one else did?
There's being seen, and then there's being
witnessed. Ash-Shahid is the ever-present witness
who testifies for you and to you. It means that He
is present in every scene, not just watching it.
And He bears witness to every truth. Isa
alayhis salam will say on the Day of Judgment,
وَكُنْتُ عَلَيْهِمْ شَهِيدًا مَا دُمْتُ فِيهِمْ
فَلَمَّا تَوَفَّيْتَنِي كُنتَ أَنتَ الرَّقِيبَ
عَلَيْهِمْ ۚ وَأَنتَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ I
was a witness over them so long as I remained
among them. Then when You took me, You were the
Watcher over them, and You are always a witness
over all things. I was a Shahid while I was
there, but You are the Shahid over everything all
the time. Our witnessing is limited. His
witnessing is constant. But just as He is a Shahid
over us as an Ummah, we are a Shahid over
all other Ummahs. So when the Prophets are called
forth on the Day of Judgment and their Ummahs deny
them, Allah calls us as Shuhada' to testify as
witnesses on behalf of all of the Prophets of
Allah. He allows us to affirm what He already knew
and honors us by making us witnesses to what He
already witnessed. But just like you testify to
what you knew they did of good, even though you
never saw it, Ash-Shahid validates your unseen labor
that no one else saw. He witnesses the time you
held yourself in pain and only responded to that
pain with patience and piety. And even with
others, He witnesses that time you held your
tongue or swallowed your pain that no one else
noticed. And He called the martyr whose pain He
saw all along a shahid, a witness, because the
shahid bears witness to Allah's reward and how He
saw them in their pain and honored them for their
sacrifice. And then He calls Himself Ar-Raqib,
the ever-watchful. A muraqib is someone who is
watching you and accounting you. Imagine if
someone had a camera on you 24/7. How different
would you be? And that would be even if that
person had no worth. Imagine Allah who is so much
more than that and has so much more than that.
Al-Imam ibn Rajab rahimahullah relates that it's
narrated that Allah revealed to one of His
prophets, قُلْ لِقَوْمِكَ مَا بَالَكُمْ
تَسْتُرُونَ الذُّنُوبَ مِنْ خَلْقِي
وَتُظْهِرُونَهَا لِي إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تَرَوْنَ أَنِّي
لَا أَرَاكُمْ فَقَدْ كَفَرْتُمْ بِي وَإِنْ
كُنْتُمْ تَرَوْنَ أَنِّي أَرَاكُمْ فَلِمَ
جَعَلْتُمُونِي أَهْوَنَ الناظِرِينَ إِلَيْكُمْ
Tell your people, "O Prophet, why do you hide your
sins from My creation, yet commit them openly
before Me? If you think I don't see you, then
you've disbelieved in Me. But if you know that I
see you, then why have you reduced Me to the least
of your observers? If you know He sees you,
then why act as though He doesn't matter?" When
Al-Junayd رضي الله تعالى عنه was asked, "How
do we lower our gaze?" He said, "By knowing that
Allah's gaze upon you precedes your gaze upon
whatever you're looking at. Allah is even
observing your thoughts before your actions. And
if you start to regulate your thoughts
accordingly, you'll naturally also regulate your
actions." So just look at, for example, how Ibn
al-Jawzi رحمه الله describes the process of
sin. He says, "First you have a passing thought,
خطرة. And then if you entertain that thought, it
becomes a فكرة, a settled thought. Then if you
think about it too much, you invite Shaitan into
your thoughts to basically put on a commercial for
that sin. So you spiritually watch the sin
salesman. And then you develop a نية, the
intention to commit that deed. And then once
you've decided to do it, you move towards it
determined and ignore the obstacles Allah puts
between you and that sin. And that's called عزيمة,
determination. And then you have عمل. Allah
actually allows you to commit that sin. Then as a
punishment for that sin, He lets you sin again and
again and again until it becomes عادة, a habitual
sin. So in the process of sin, imagine if you
were practicing muraqaba and you interrupted at
the level of Him observing your thoughts. It's a
powerful notion. Sahl Ibn Abdillah rahimahullah,
he says that, "My uncle taught me to repeat every
night as I went to bed, الله معي، الله
شاهدي، الله ناظر إلي. Allah is with me.
Allah is witnessing me. Allah is looking at me."
So he said, "I would repeat this until I found
the sweetness of it. أَنْتَ تُرَاقِبُ اللَّهَ
وَاللَّهُ يُرَاقِبُكَ You observe Allah and He
observes you. You start to observe Allah with
everything around you, glorifying Him, seeking
Him, and trusting Him. Ibn al-Qayyim rahimahullah
says, "The sign of true muraqaba of Allah's sight
is to prefer what Allah has revealed to magnify
what He magnified and to treat as small what He
treated as small." So you take this muraqaba and
you use it not just to discourage you from sins,
but to push you to secret good deeds. I always
tell people, "Let there be a good deed so
secretive between you and Allah that you look
forward to Him bringing it up on the Day of
Judgment. But before you seek that moment on that
day and hope for the veil that will cover you
from the creation and humiliation, what about when
What about when you do slip here? That brings us
to His last name in this order: As-Sittir,
like Al-Ghafur covers the effects of your sin by
removing its consequence, As-Sittir covers the sin
itself from people while
He calls your heart back to Him. If He's
been concealing your private sins from creation,
know that He's still inviting you to heal. He
honors your shame, but will you honor His name
while He's watching you commit that sin against
Him? And if He exposes you, that may also be
to heal you instead of humiliate you. How's that
possible? The Prophet ﷺ
said that whoever commits a sin in this world and
is punished while they're still here, Allah is too
generous to repeat that punishment in the
hereafter. And whoever commits a sin in this world
and Allah conceals it and pardons him, Allah is
too generous to retract His pardon when He already
granted it. There was a thief that was once
brought to Umar رضي الله عنه. And he
said, "By Allah, I have never stolen before." Umar
رضي الله عنه said, "كذبت," you're
lying." Because Allah never exposes a person the
first time he commits a sin. He gives him a
chance to come back before people find out. And
then afterwards, the man admitted that he actually
stole 21 times before getting caught. And because
Allah is as-Sittīr, He loves when we become a veil
for one another. The Prophet (ﷺ)
Wasallam said, مَنْ سَتَرَ مُسْلِمًا سَتَرَهُ
اللَّهُ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ Whoever covers
the fault of a Muslim, Allah will cover him in
this world and the hereafter. So give others the
very covering you crave from your Lord. Be the
cloak, not the spotlight. Sitr is not complicity
with the sin. It's a mercy that restrains our
tongues from broadcasting sin while we help a
person repent and make amends and prevent them
from further harming themselves before they harm
someone else. And SubhanAllah, the only exception
to this is if they pose a threat of harm
to other brothers and sisters who need to be
forewarned. And there's a warning here too. The
Prophet (ﷺ) said, "O you
who believe with your tongues while faith has not
yet entered your hearts, don't go searching for
the faults of the Muslims. For whoever pursues his
brother's faults, Allah will pursue his faults.
And if Allah pursues his faults, He will expose
him even within his own house." So let us be
a community of Sitr, quick to help, slow to
expose, brave enough to confront harm through
the right channels, and humble enough to leave off
gossip disguised as concern. In giving cover to
others, we're only imitating the Lord who has
covered us more times than we can count. And that
means that even when we come across someone doing
something wrong by chance, we remind them of
as-Sittīr in a very particular way. Muhammad ibn
al-Munkadir rahimahullah once stumbled across a
man and a woman alone on the path. So he
said to them gently, إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَرَاكُمَا
سَتَرَنَا اللَّهُ وَإِيَّاكُمَا Allah sees you
both. May He cover us and cover you. Let Allah
see you in beautiful struggle against sin and in
beautiful secret acts of good that you did only
for Him. And reminding people of His beautiful
Sitr. When no one saw you, al-Basir saw you. When
no one stood up for you, ash-Shahid recorded you.
When you were about to derail, ar-Raqib awakened
you. And when you couldn't bear the shame of your
lapse into sin, as-Sittīr covered you. And you may
find that He doesn't just give you peace from the
world that seeks to humiliate you, but He may
honor you with a peace in your heart
that only He holds.
يَا بَصِيرُ You see what no one else sees.
Every tear I hide, every effort unnoticed,
every quiet act of good. Let me find comfort
in being seen by you when I feel invisible
to the rest of the world. يَا شَهِيدُ
Be my witness when my intentions are pure
and when they falter, let my fear of you set
them a-right. Let me live conscious that you are
always truly watching and die as one
who lived truthfully under your sight.
يَا رَقِيبُ Watch over my heart when it drifts
and over my thoughts before they turn to deeds.
Make me mindful of you in secret and in public
until awareness of you becomes my protection
from slip. يَا سَتِّيرُ Cover my faults
with the same grace you always have.
Hide my flaws even as you heal them. Let my
repentance be quiet and my shame sincere and my
forgiveness made complete beneath your
protective veil. وَلِلَّهِ الْأَسْمَاءُ
الْحُسْنَى فَادْعُوهُ
بِهَا.