# The Wisdom Behind Your Pain - Al-Alim Al-Hakim Al-Latif

Where are you going?
Why are you still up? I can't sleep.
I was just talking to my mother
and I'm reassured that she's safe.
It was a good talk, but
the buzzing of the drone in my head won't go away. I can't sleep.
Do you feel better now? Yes, thank God.
I have a two-hour meeting.
I'll be back, then we'll talk to your mom. Well,
How are you going to go without a car anyway?
One of the worst feelings in the world is
abandonment. They mocked the Prophet with it
early on, and it hurt him
deeply until assurance came down from Allah
Himself. Your Lord has not forsaken you.
But we don't receive divine
assurance through direct revelation like the Prophet,
but we do in the sense
that Allah could have sent that message through
Jibril without making it a part of the Quran. But
when Allah records divine assurance for any of the
prophets before, He's doing that for you now as
well. But when the pain feels pointless and you
can't trace the pattern, your first instinct may be
to just ask Allah, "Why?" And as much as Allah
He has buried His wisdom and His divine decree in a
plan that you can't see. None of your pain is
invisible to Him, no matter how deep you bury it
within your chest. "Whether you hide what is in your hearts"
"or reveal it, Allah knows it." Whether you bury
it deep in your chest or bring it to your
lips, Allah already knows it. Only He knows the
secrets of His plan and the secrets of your heart
at the same time. And remember the advice of Yaqub
to Yusuf, the father to the son, right before he bids
him farewell for decades of distance after a
beautiful dream? It's not like when you take your
child to an airport or send them off to school,
but before he was ripped away from him in a
dirty plot that would unfold in the most
unimaginable of places. Yaqub didn't hand Yusuf a
map to get home. He handed him the names of Allah.
"Indeed, your Lord is All-Knowing, All-Wise."
"Surely your Lord is all-knowing, all-wise." If you
internalize this one single verse, you'll know how to
interpret everything in life that you can't
interpret. And Yaqub would have his own
test internalizing this. Because while Yusuf was
surrounded by strangers, Yaqub was surrounded by
family from whom he was estranged. And both he and
Yusuf would have to wait to see what this plan
was ultimately going to reveal. Al-Alim, the
All-Knowing, is He who knows what will happen
before it does. Al-Hakim, the All-Wise, is He who
allows it to happen anyway, but for a greater
purpose. Al-Alim knows what you're going through
when no one else does. Al-Hakim knows the purpose
of your going through it, even when you don't.
Al-Alim knows all the whats. Al-Hakim knows all
the whys. And that's why these names are almost
always paired together, and why they held Yusuf
together during this impossible journey. Another
implication of these two names is that He knows all
of the alternative histories in your life. He knows
what was, what is, what will be, and exactly how
it would have been otherwise. So He knows all of
the near infinite possibilities of what your story
could have been. But this is exactly how your story
should play out. There's a greater weaving that you
don't see yet. And you don't know what chapter
you're in because you're neither the writer nor the
reader. You're the book being authored. And you
can't let the intensity of the experience of the
difficulties in that plan cloud your trust of His
knowledge and wisdom behind that plan. So Yaqub had
Jacob had to hold onto these names when his kids
called him a crazy old man because he was still
holding onto hope after all these years. And he
responds and says, "I know from Allah what
you do not know."
What is he talking about? Did he know the plan?
Or did he remember the dream that Joseph
shared with him? That is one interpretation. But
some scholars of Tafsir say that he meant by
that, "I know of Allah what you don't know." My
relationship with my Lord is different. I know Him
to be Al-Alim, Al-Hakim, All-Knowing and All-Wise.
Joseph then had to hold onto those names
throughout the years of degradation and torment.
From the darkness of the well to the prison cell.
Those two names sat in his chest like lamps.
Al-Alim, Al-Hakim. "I don't know why this is
happening to me, but He does. And I know it is
better for me. So how do I worship Allah now
in this situation in a way that He'll be pleased?"
And when the story curved back and he stood as
the leader of Egypt, reunited with his family, he
didn't stop at Al-Hamdulillah in the generic sense.
He reached for a name that sometimes you can only
really taste after surviving the storm. Al-Latif,
The ever-subtle, gentle, and kind. "Indeed, my Lord
is subtle in what He wills. Indeed, He is the Knower,
the Wise." "My Lord is subtle in what He wills.
Indeed, He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise." Notice
the order? His father taught him Al-Aleem and
Al-Hakeem to carry him through it all. But his life
experiences unveiled for him Al-Latif. Because you
can't perceive Lutf, His subtle presence and gentle
delivery of His decree until you've
surrendered yourself to His all-encompassing
wisdom. How can I trust Al-Latif with the details if
I question Al-Aleem, Al-Hakeem on the master plan?
Does He who created not know,
while He is the Subtle, the Aware? Does He who created
not know what He created? That's the grand plan.
And He is Al-Latif, Al-Khabir, the ever-subtle, yet
ever-aware. Those are the small details. Al-Latif is
such a beautiful name that many people
will say is their favorite name of Allah. It means
the subtle, the gentle, and the kind all at
the same time. Then what's the difference between
Al-Latif and Al-Rafiq? Or Al-Latif and Al-Muhsin?
Since sometimes you'll just see Al-Latif translated
as the Kind. The scholars explain that Al-Latif is
He who delivers kindness and grace in hidden ways.
Al-Latif is the one who delivers His gentleness,
His grace, and His kindness, but
through hidden paths. And Imam Al-Ghazali
explained that Lutf has two strands. Knowledge of
the hidden details that only He knows.
And then the delivery of hidden benefits, the
hidden ways to deliver those benefits that only He
knows. Al-Latif will put a glass of water or a
piece of paper or a sudden thought in your mind
or someone else's or a sudden sense of calm, gently
and unnoticeably. But it ends up being a game
changer in the moment. And that's why you often only
recognize Lutf in hindsight. Because you remember
those little signposts and mercies along the way
that you couldn't really recognize in the intensity
of the constriction, that seizure of test and trial.
But just like Allah is the only one who knows what
happened and could have happened and knows the
wisdom behind it, He's also the only one who can
actually see what's happening in front of you right
now. Because if your foresight or hindsight are
20/20, Allah always sees infinite. Allah even plants
His Lutf for you in nature so that you can
hold it in your palm. Do you not see that Allah
sent down rain from the sky and the earth becomes
...green. Allah is Most Subtle, All-Aware. Do you
not see that Allah sends down rain from the sky
and then the earth becomes green? Surely Allah is
most subtle, all-aware. You didn't perceive any of
the photosynthesis. You just woke up and the field
was green. That's Lutf, work so gentle and hidden
that you only notice it when the blessing is already
in your hands. So when do you know that His
Lutf worked after you see it come together? But when
should you trust Al-Latif? During the trial, when
you can say, "I know that He knows, and I
know that He knows why." That's enough. I trust the
planner enough to not need to know the plan or
the details of how He's going to execute that plan.
Now look again at Yusuf's timeline through that
lens. He could have focused on his brothers' cruelty
in throwing him into the well and said, "If
Al-Alim, the All-Knowing, knew that this was going
to happen, why didn't He stop it?" But instead, He
focused on Al-Latif, sending him the strangers' hand
to lift him up from the well. He could have
stared at the prison wall and despaired and said,
"Why would Al-Hakim, the All-Wise, allow this to
happen to me and put me in this rotten hole?"
Instead, he noticed Al-Latif, sending him the two
cellmates with dreams for him to interpret. So
in your own life, in a Yusuf-like season
and the night is heavy, you have a choice in
what to anchor yourself in. Either you stare at the
hardship and interrogate His knowledge and wisdom,
or you start searching for the small mercies that
keep meeting you by surprise. The friend who
suddenly texted you, "Are you okay?" The person who
you saw who was in a worse circumstance than you,
the verse that you stumbled upon that felt like it
was revealed to you in that moment. This is from
Allah's kindness. These are His drops of subtle
kindness to let you know that He's the one who's
in control of the storm. But here's the thing. Allah
doesn't just know all the little pathways in your
decree. He also knows all the little secrets in your
heart. So He pairs His name with al-Khabir, the
all-aware. al-Latif, al-Khabir. al-Khabir is the one
who knows the inside and the outside, the cause and
the consequence of everything. You don't question
the details of Al-Latif's recorded plan because you
can't access His wisdom. But you do question the
details of yourself because you know that Al-Khabir
has access to your otherwise unrecorded thoughts and
feelings. Even the angels can only record your
deeds. But Al-Khabir is the one who records your
hidden intentions. You know when we say mukhabarat,
intelligence services that try to monitor every
little detail of people's lives, usually without
mercy? Allah is Al-Khabir, but with mercy. So He
knows you inside and then sends you signs to repent
based on the intelligence He has on you. But He
also has full intelligence on the one who intends
you harm, like Yusuf's brothers before they plotted.
Allah already took that into account with His plan.
But like all of His other names, these names are
meant to shape comfort and accountability. Because
the same Al-Latif who slips you a mercy that you
didn't earn is the same Al-Khabir who will bring
forth a deed that you thought no one would ever see.
Listen to the advice of Luqman to his son.
Just like Yaqub once advised his son Yusuf. But this
is an entirely different context. "O my son,
indeed if it should be the weight of a mustard seed
and should be within a rock or in the heavens or in
the earth, Allah will bring it forth. Indeed Allah
is Subtle and Aware." "O my son, even if a deed
were the weight of a mustard seed, hidden in a
stone or somewhere lost in the heavens and the
earth, Allah will surely bring it forward. Surely
Allah is Subtle and Aware." Do you feel the pairing
here? Subtlety is in the finding of that
buried seed. Awareness is in the precision of
bringing it forth on Judgment Day. So you
should know that the smallest breath of obedience
and the quietest treachery both have weight in the
sight of Allah. So if it was the charity you
slid under a door or gave so anonymously that even
the recipient didn't know, or the fitna
that you lit behind the scenes, but no one
could pin it on you, the resentment you stoked
and fed in secret, Allah will bring it all forth.
"He will bring forth all of it." Not to humiliate
the repentant, but because His justice is built on
His perfect knowledge. And He promised not to wrong
anyone by the measure of an atom. So surely
He knows the measure of that atom to judge
it on the Day of Judgment. And please let
these names rescue you from a common trap. Putting
Allah's plan on trial with your limited intellect.
Hold yourself accountable to your deeds, not Allah
accountable to your understanding of His decree. The
angels taught us this etiquette of knowing our
limits when they said, "Exalted are You; we have
no knowledge except what You taught us.
The Wise. "Glory be to You. We have no knowledge
except that which You taught us. Verily You are
The All-Knowing, The Wise." And
the next time you say to yourself, "I don't see
the wisdom," answer yourself with, "Of course I
don't see the wisdom. His wisdom comes from His
knowledge, which I can't encompass. It's He who is
The All-Knowing, The Wise,
above me. And He who delivers a subtlety
around me that I can't possibly track. And an
awareness I can't possess. The Subtle, The Aware."
O All-Knowing, You know what I hide and show,
what I've done and what I will do.
Let what You know of me be better than what
people know of me. And forgive me for what only
You know. Teach me what benefits me. And let what
You keep hidden from me always be for my good.
O Wise, Your wisdom surrounds what I cannot
understand. When I question the purpose, remind me
of Your perfection. Grant me the patience to trust
Your timing and the insight to see the beauty
unfolding in Your decree. O Subtle, work
gently through the details of my life. Send
kindnesses that I may not notice until I look back,
but can still feel at every moment. Let Your subtle
care reach the corners of my heart that no words
or people could ever touch. O All-Aware,
You are fully aware of what's within me,
my fears, my flaws, and my hidden intentions. Purify
what You see inside of me until it is pleasing
to You. And let nothing inside me here contradict
what will be produced when I stand before
You bare. To Allah belong the most beautiful
names, so call upon Him
by them.