# Why Won't Allah Heal Me - Ash-Shafi At-Tayyib

Adam. Allah - there is no deity except Him,
the Ever-Living, the Self-Sustaining. Neither...
...drowsiness overtakes Him nor sleep. To Him...
...belongs what is in the heavens and the earth.
Who can intercede with Him except by His permission?
He knows what is before them and what is after them,
and they encompass not a thing of His knowledge...
...except for what He wills. His Kursi extends...
...over the heavens and the earth, and their...
...preservation tires Him not. He is the Most High,
the Most Great.
Mom, I'm sorry I'm not there to protect you.
You are with me here like this.
What do you mean I'm here? I'm not here.
You must believe, Adam, that I am always with you,
and that I am always here.
But how?
Muhammad bin Hatib says, "I
was just a child when a pot of boiling liquid
tipped and burnt my hand, and then my mother
frantically ran with me
to the house of the Prophet.
What would you do if you lived in Medina then
and needed a doctor, but the man whose prayer
is always answered lives right next door?" He said...
A healing that leaves no illness. Take away the harm,
Lord of people. Heal, for You are the healer, and
there is no healing except Your healing, a healing
that leaves behind no trace of illness or
affliction." Since healing isn't truly found
through medicine or even a capable doctor, you
turn to His name as Shafi, the Absolute Healer. He
heals entirely, and He heals everything. And before
the pill, the Band-Aids, and before the
pharmacy, you call upon Ash-Shafi because the doctor
can only treat, but only Allah can heal. Take
the means and do not worship the means. Take the
means, but don't turn the means into an object of
worship. Now, if you have the means, as in the
money, you often think about who the best doctor is
to treat this particular disease, or where can I get
this procedure done from the most prestigious place
because I have the ability to pay for it. But look
at what the Prophet said.
No Muslim visits a sick brother or sister and says
seven times, "I ask Allah the Almighty, Lord of the
Mighty Throne, to heal you." "I ask Allah the Almighty,
Lord of the Mighty Throne, to cure you. That person
will be cured unless his time has come." So who
is the doctor? It's not some human in a VIP
hospital that you can't afford or get an appointment
with. It's the Lord of the Mighty
Throne. But notice that the Prophet
said that unless his time has come. But what
happened to the healing of the prayer? It simply
healed you from something else. It healed you from
sin, or it healed you from punishment, or it healed
you from arrogance. In fact, the Healer even heals with
the sickness itself. As the Prophet
said, "Do not curse the fever, for it burns
off your sins the way that fire burns off filth
from iron." When Uthman went to
visit Abdullah ibn Mas'ud as he was in his
final moments of illness, he said, "What is ailing you?"
"What is ailing you?" He said, "My
sins." And Uthman said, "And what would
you like to make you feel better?" He said, "My Lord's mercy."
He said, "The mercy of my Lord." Uthman said, "Shall I
bring you a doctor?" "Do you want me to call a doctor for
you?" Ibn Mas'ud said, "The doctor made me sick."
"The doctor is the one who prescribed me this illness,"
meaning Allah. Just like the Provider sometimes provides
by restricting, the Healer sometimes heals by
illness, but in a different way. You see, you trust
the healer so much that every treatment is a success
as long as you accept it. And on top of that, you
actively ask during your illness for more
than just the physical treatment to work, but for
the disease to take your sins and concerns away
with it so that your rank would be elevated in
the sight of Allah. A great doctor treats you so
that you're even better than before, right? Ash-Shafi
raises your rank and removes your sins while also
healing your pain and illness. Think of this other
scenario. When the Prophet was
sick and it wasn't a nurse that visited him in
a hospital, Jibril comes to visit the Prophet
and he says, "Muhammad, are you
feeling sick?" He said, "Yes, Jibril." "Yes, O
Jibril." So Jibril puts his hand on him and
says, "In the name of Allah, I perform ruqyah for you
from the evil of every soul or envious eye,
may Allah heal you. In the name of Allah, I recite
over you from everything that ails you, from every
harm, from every evil eye. In the name of Allah,
I recite over you." Look how comprehensive this
healing is. And Allah knows that you've probably
been through a lot and that you need to be
put back together holistically. But remember that
the one who can put you back together isn't in
a clinic or a capsule. He's the Lord of the Throne
and at the same time closer to you than
your jugular vein. And if you turn your face upward
with a single sigh, it reaches Him as a cry
from the heart. And the Strong doesn't just give you
strength. The Healer mends you from within, and He is
with you when you are sick. The Prophet
said that on the Day of Judgment, Allah
will say, "O son of Adam, I was sick, but you
did not visit me." And he will say, "My
Lord, how could I visit you when you are the Lord
of the worlds?" And Allah will say, "Did you
not know that my servant so-and-so was sick and you
did not visit him? And had you visited him, you
would have found me with him." So the Healer is with
the ill, healing in real time even with His
presence. And the one who is ill only attributes
healing to Allah. And that's why Abraham
said, "And when I am ill, it is He who cures me." And when I
fall ill, it is He who cures me. He attributed
the illness to Himself, but then reserved the cure
exclusively for Allah. And even the prophets knew
that they couldn't heal themselves. They knew that
only the Healer owns the cure and schedules its descent
in the same way He does His revelation. And Allah
He didn't just name Himself the Healer. He made His
revelation a healing as well. "And We send down
from the Qur'an that which is healing and mercy
for the believers." And We send down of the Qur'an
that which is healing and mercy for the believers.
It covers much more than a flu. Imam
Ibn al-Qayyim said: I once stayed in
Mecca and fell ill with no access to a
doctor or medicine. He said, "I treated myself
with al-Fatiha." I began to treat myself with
Surah al-Fatiha and saw an astonishing effect.
I started to prescribe it to people in
pain, and they also recovered quickly.
Glory be to God, the same Surah you recite 17 times
a day that heals spiritual darkness is also
medicine for the body. As you take physical
means to heal the body, remember He is also
the Giver of means. When medicine works, He created
its elements and properties. When it doesn't,
He decreed a different door of healing for you to
enter. By God, this is not a dismissal of
doctors or medicine. Some diagnoses
require treatment, therapy, support, and
medicine and such. It was Muslim
scholars who pioneered medicine and who
wrote encyclopedias on different forms of treatment,
while at the same time, Muslim leaders built the
world's first hospitals. Yet still, the Qur'an is
healing and mercy walking next to your medication,
not replacing it, but blessing it. But how do you
make sure that your prayers shine even while in
the midst of your illness? This brings us to the
next door. Allah is the Pure. The Prophet
said, "Indeed, Allah is Pure,
and He accepts only what is pure." Indeed, Allah
is pure, and He accepts only what is pure. Al-Imam
Ibn al-Qayyim said, "He is the Pure," meaning
nothing emanates from Him except what is good, and
nothing ascends to Him except what is good, and
nothing draws near to Him except what is good. The
phrase "No god but Allah" is the pure word,
because it cures the most fatal spiritual
disease of polytheism. And the city of the Prophet
is Taybah, it is pure, because it expels
the greatest evils of hypocrisy and is blessed even
in its grain. And Allah calls those who are of His
noble servants and hence suitable spouses,
the pure men and pure women.
And in one narration, when you go to visit someone
who is sick so that you can call upon the Healer
to cure them, a caller from the heavens cries
out, "May you be pure, may your path be blessed,
and may you dwell in a home in Paradise."
May you be pure. May your walk be blessed,
and may you arrive to your abode in Paradise.
And when they are welcomed into Paradise,
it will be said, "Peace be unto you.
You have been purified. Enter it forever."
The beautiful people for the beautiful one,
the pure ones near the pure. Allah is pure.
He only accepts that which is pure.
And on that basis, you have to ask yourself
if you have been praying for Allah to heal you
or insisting upon Allah to answer you.
On what basis do you expect that answer
when you have contaminated your provisions
with that which is impure? The Prophet said
that a disheveled traveler raises his hands
and says, "O Lord, O Lord," with signs
of desperation, but his food is unlawful,
his drink is unlawful, his clothing is unlawful,
and he is nourished by that which is unlawful.
So on what basis does he expect to be answered?
If you want the door of healing to open,
purify the key: pure earnings, food, intent, company.
heavenly pathways for yourself with that which
is impure. This is where people confuse two
names. When we chase health and wealth, two of the
greatest blessings after faith, we
need to remember that we can't pit the names of
Allah against each other. You can't call upon
Allah Ar-Razzaq for wealth and Allah Ash-Shafi for
healing, but then ignore Him as At-Tayyib. Allah has
demands of you in order to bless your prayers. And
if you want that blessing to remain, then keep the
means pure. If you want healing, don't poison
your medicine. You approach Allah with pure
nourishment in every element of your life, and then
you depend upon Him to unlock the cure. And that
takes us to His final name in this family. You
will always find Allah when you meet His demands to
be Al-Mu'ti, the Giver. Al-Mu'ti is the Giver whose
giving never runs dry. We say every day after our
prayer, as the Prophet taught,
"O Allah, none can withhold what You have given,"
"and none can give what You have withheld."
O Allah, there is no one who can withhold
what You give, and there is no one who
can give what You withhold. In another narration:
"Whomever Allah wants good for, He gives him depth."
Allah is the Giver and I am the distributor.
When Allah wants good for someone, He gives him
understanding of religion. Allah is the Giver,
and I am the distributor. So the Prophet
himself points away from himself to the source,
just like a doctor points beyond his prescription.
The Giver owns the treasures of revelation and
knowledge. And the prophets were just delivering
the package, just as the Healer owns the
healing, but the doctors just treat with His
cure. He gives us not only things, but states
of being. You know how sometimes the doctor
says, "You're cured," but you still don't feel
healthy, or you can't name the pain or explain
what exactly feels off? The Giver gives you states
that are good. He gives you tranquility when
you're anxious. He gives you clarity when you're
confused. He gives you contentment when you receive
bad news. Feel the rhythm of healing when you
call upon Him with these names. The Healer removes
disease. The Pure purifies so that the wound
isn't reinfected. The Giver gives what rebuilds you
so that you don't get sick again. That's the rhythm
of healing with Allah's names. As for the plan
of healing with your actions, consider your
environment and consumption. Physically, when we
trade clean food, water, and air for junk that
hurts us, disease naturally follows. Mentally, when
we plague our minds with noise and toxic
comparisons, restlessness follows. And spiritually,
we're no different. When our ears, eyes, and
tongues live in foulness, we're just not going to be
spiritually healthy and are asking for the same
disease to return again and again while fooling
ourselves by pretending that we want the cure. You
can't keep demanding a cure while clinging to what
poisoned you in the first place. But here's the good
news. When the Prophet
says, "Every disease has a cure,"
that means spiritual diseases too. But you
have to be willing to take the medicine. And
medicine is usually bitter. But the one who can
finally cure you can also prescribe a patience for
you that can sustain you in the process. And true
healing isn't the absence of pain. It's the presence
of His peace filling the space that pain once occupied.
O Healer,
heal me in ways that medicine can't fix.
Remove whatever sickness has touched my body and
expel along with it any sin that poisoned my soul.
Let every ache remind me of Your mercy and every
cure draw me closer to You. Heal this
Ummah from its wounds and make us whole
again through faith and patience. O Pure One,
Make my life pure enough to be accepted by You.
Purify my wealth from the unlawful and my
worship from showing off. Purify my clothes and my
food and every way that I seek You. O Giver,
Giver of all that heals and all that sustains. Let
me never forget that every gift from You is a
blessed call back to You. And let it find me
only as a grateful recipient
and servant. To Allah belong the most
beautiful names, so call upon Him by them.