# When You Want to React But Don't - As-Sabur Al-Halim

You have to believe Adam.
Mom! Mom..
There's this moment in the Seerah where some of the
Ansar kept asking the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم over
and over again, and he kept on giving them صلى
الله عليه وسلم until there was literally nothing left
to give. And then he said, "Whatever good I have,
I will never withhold from you. But whoever refrains
from asking, Allah will help him in that. And whoever
seeks to be self-sufficient, Allah will enrich him to
that." But then he said, وَمَنْ يَتَصَبَّرْ
يُصَبِّرْهُ اللَّهُ "Whoever seeks to be patient,
Allah will make him patient." And then listen
carefully. He said, وَمَا أُعْطِيَ أَحَدٌ عَطَاءً
خَيْرًا وَأَوْسَعَ مِنَ الصَّبْرِ "No one has ever
been given a gift better and more vast than
patience." So who do you think gave you that gift?
Allah is As-Sabur, the All-Patient. He is patient
with his power and with your disobedience. But his
patience is not the patience of one who cannot act.
It's the patience of one who can do everything in
an instant, yet still chooses the perfect moment.
He's patient with his decree in that he doesn't panic
like we do. And he never ends up with any
regrets because he never acts in haste. Think about
it for us. الصبر عند الصدمة الأولى. Patience
is at the first strike. And while some people will
pass that test, as the trial runs longer, those same
people will eventually lose it. Allah is not rocked
in the moment, nor does he ever need to change
course. His plan unfolds without disruption and with
perfection. And he is patient with his servants. He
sees the sin as it forms, then withholds the
punishment so that the door of return stays open. He
plants a seed of repentance into a hard heart and
then gives it time to sprout. He is patient with
generations. Nations rise and fall, and he lets a
noisy tyrant run what he thinks is his victory lap,
only to let the truth win and then teach a
lesson through him. He's not late to history. History
is early to him because he already wrote it. And
because his patience is endless, he invites you to
seek it from him. وَاسْتَعِينُوا بِالصَّبْرِ
وَالصَّلَاةِ "Seek help through patience and prayer."
Patience here is as Ibn Abbas radiyallahu 'anhuma says,
the fasting that you're doing right now, because you
hold back for his sake, and he gives back without
measure." إِنَّمَا يُوَفَّى الصَّابِرُونَ أَجْرَهُمْ
بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ. Indeed, the patient are repaid
without account, because he's not only the giver of
reward, he's the giver of the capacity by which you
reach it." And the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم said
that Allah has said all of the actions of the son
of Adam are for him except for fasting. "Fasting
is mine, and I reward for it." And knowing that you
want that reward from as-Sabur is precisely what
gives you sabr. So when there was a woman who
was having seizures at the time of the Prophet صلى
الله عليه وسلم, she said, "Ya Rasulullah, when I have
these seizures, I fall, and sometimes أتكشف, I'm
exposed. So can you make dua to Allah to remove
this epilepsy from me?" He said, "If you want, I
can ask Allah to remove it, and He will. Or you
can be patient, and you'll have Jannah in return."
She said, "Ya Rasulullah, I choose Jannah.
But can you ask Allah that when I have a
seizure, I'm not exposed?" And so he did.
SubhanAllah, she went from wanting شفاء from
ash-Shafi, who can always heal, to wanting patience
from as-Sabur because she knew that He would give her
the capacity and the reward at the end that would
make it all worth it. And His patience is entirely
fulfilling and always enduring, just like every other
one of his names and attributes. And when the Prophet
And when the Prophet ﷺ said that patience is the best
gift and the most vast gift, you can see why.
Because if Allah gives you a single blessing, but you
don't have perspective, you'll still feel
unfulfilled. But when He gives you perspective, all
of your blessings seem vast. And then in the
hereafter, you're rewarded with immeasurable return.
While you're still on this earth, إِنَّ اللَّهَ مَعَ
الصَّابِرِينَ, Allah is indeed with the patient. And
then when He enters you into Paradise, سَلَامٌ
عَلَيْكُمْ بِمَا صَبَرْتُمْ, peace be unto you for
the patience that you showed. So what does it look
like when we seek to manifest patience that only He
can give? There are a few categories. There's sabr
over your desire, when you hold back from your
desires, even when you have access, trusting His
promise of a greater reward. Then there's sabr in
hardship, where you restrain your reaction when
you're stuck in pain, trusting His replacement will
be with a greater reward. And then there's sabr upon
obedience. You see good deeds through so that they
aren't just flashes of good, but qualities we attain.
Think of it in this way, just like Allah's power
lives behind all of His names, patience has to live
behind all of your good qualities so that they're not
temporary states, but permanent stations. And then
there is sabr as in resilience, where every time you
get knocked down, you get up and you rebuild better,
just like the people of Gaza have shown us. But there
is another type of sabr, and that's the sabr
with people. And that is when we feel like we're
running out of patience with them. And maybe that's
because you've forgotten how patient Allah has been
with you, which brings us to his next name. Allah
is Al-Halim, the Forbearing. Hilm is a very specific
application of patience, but it's the hardest
application of that patience for us as humans, which
is why it's so rewardable. But to Allah, when you
think of Al-Halim, the Forbearing, how many times
could he have seized you at the very moment of your
sin? And yet he didn't. If every sin was
inked instantly and punishedright away, where would
we be? He gives you time, not because he's
indifferent or incapable, but because he's Al-Halim.
His forbearance isn't weakness, but it's measured
power that comes from his infinite grace, because
only the powerful can hold back even when provoked.
وَلَوْ يُؤَاخِذُ اللَّهُ النَّاسَ بِمَا كَسَبُوا مَا
تَرَكَ عَلَى ظَهْرِهَا مِنْ دَابَّةٍ, and if Allah
were to impose blame on the people for what they
have earned, no creature would survive on this earth.
If He seized us the first time that we made
mistakes, none of us would remain. But He lengthens
the rope, not to ignore us, but to reach us.
So while He could seize you the moment that you
sin, He delays the pen to give you a door.
وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ حَلِيمٌ, and know
that Allah is ever forgiving, ever forbearing.
Al-Ghafur is usually the name that He pairs with
Al-Halim because He's not only forbearing in the
moment, but still forgiving later. SubhanAllah, two
things we're so often incapable of: letting it go now
and not even letting it linger later. And then
sometimes He pairs Al-Halim with Al-Alim, which
means He knows why you did it, or even if you're
going to do it again, but He still overlooks.
And He pairs Al-Halim with Al-Ghani. How many of us
are only patient with people because we either fear
them or we want something from them? He has no
need of any of that. And on top of all
of that, وَاللَّهُ شَاكِرٌ حَلِيمٌ, Allah is
appreciative and forbearing. So not only does He not
punish you right away when you commit a sin, He
rewards you for the smallest intentions for good
deeds you didn't even get to do. And as much
as any of us could never come close to any
of this, we should still try. And that's why the
Prophet ﷺ said, الَّذِي يُخَالِطُ
النَّاسَ وَيَصْبِرُ عَلَى أَذَاهُمْ خَيْرٌ مِنَ
الَّذِي لَا يُخَالِطُ النَّاسَ وَلَا يَصْبِرُ عَلَى
أَذَاهُمْ, the one who mixes with the people and is
patient with their harm is far better than the one
who does not mix with them and has no patience
with their harm. That's أذى, which could be the
smallest annoyance that makes us blow up on people.
But when we look at Yusuf from that position of
power, holding back at that moment with his brothers
where he could have sentenced them to death, or the
Prophet ﷺ, emulating that حلم in his
return to Mecca, where his enemies were admitting
that they are depending solely on his benevolence
because they knew they did not deserve to be spared.
But he spared them, not for them, but for Allah.
And if you think you're too good to have to deal
with this, the Prophet ﷺ, was
so much better than you, but they dumped camel
intestines on him. They spat on him. They stoned him.
They cursed him. They called him the worst of names
and even ran him out from his home. But he
still forgave them. Look at how many people insult
Allah day and night, and He leaves them. Even Fir'aun
was addressed with gentleness قَوْلاً لَيِّنًا
لَعَلَّهُ يَتَذَكَّرُ أَوْ يَخْشَى, so that maybe
even he would recalibrate and rethink his ways.
That's how vast Allah's forbearance is. And across
the world, at this very second, He still feeds those
who deny Him. The Prophet ﷺ said,
"No one shows more patience upon hearing abuse than
Allah. They attribute a son to Him, yet He still
gives them health and provision. He hears every
blasphemy and every denial, and yet the sun still
rises for them, and the rain still falls, and He
still fills their bellies and their bank accounts."
That's forbearance paired with absolute authority. So
who are you and I not to be patient? And you
know, in human terms, when someone so lowly
resorts to low insults, we say to each other, "Don't
stoop to their level. Be better than them. When they
go low, go high." Allah is Al-Ali, the Exalted.
Al-Ali means He is elevated over all creation.
The scholars speak of عُلُوُّ الذَّات، عُلُوُّ الصِّفَات،
عُلُوُّ الْقَهْر, He is elevated in His essence,
elevated in His attributes, and elevated in His
dominance. وَسِعَ كُرْسِيهُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ
وَلَا يَئُودُهُ حِفْظُهُمَا ۚ وَهُوَ الْعَلِيُّ الْعَظِيمُ
الْعَلِيُّ الْعَظِيمُ. His footstool is more vast than the
entire heavens and the earth, and he is the Exalted,
the Almighty. So when you feel small, crushed,
forgotten, or trampled upon in regards to your rights
or reputation, remember Al-Ali. He's not scrambling
down here with you and I. He's above it all,
seeing what we can't see and holding what we can't
hold. And then there is the name Al-Muta'ali, the
Supremely Exalted. Al-Muta'ali means that Allah is
not only the most high in rank, but he's absolutely
above and beyond all limitations. So he's exalted not
only above, but beyond, beyond likeness, beyond
limits, beyond your frame. Remember the difference
between Al-Wahid and Al-Ahad? This is similar.
عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ وَالشَّهَادَةِ الْكَبِيرُ
الْمُتَعَالِ. He is the Knower of the unseen and the
seen, the greatest and the Supremely Exalted. He's
dominant in what you see and exalted even in what
you don't. So Imam Ibn Kathir (رحمه الله) explains
that he encompasses everything in knowledge and
subdues everything in power, both with the seen and
the unseen. So when thunder rolls and the sky shakes,
remember وَيُسَبِّحُ الرَّعْدُ بِحَمْدِهِ
وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ مِنْ خِيفَتِهِ, while the thunder is
glorifying his praise, the angels too are in awe of
him. Can you imagine? Even the sound that startles
you, the thunder, is actually doing tasbih. And the
angels in the heavens that you can't see are also
doing tasbih. So the scholars say Al-Ali is dominant
over what you see. Al-Muta'ali is dominant even over
what you can't see. Every human claim to divine
elevation is just a passing mirage of arrogance bound
to tragically collapse. But you don't have to. Listen
to what the names of Allah are telling you. As-Sabur
gives you patience for all times and brings relief at
the perfect time. Al-Halim is patient with you. So
be patient with His plan and hasten your repentance.
Al-Ali controls from above all that you see and
can't see. And Al-Muta'ali reigns supreme over what
you can't even imagine. So trust His vantage point
and His supremacy over those who are testing your
صبر. Because if they're testing your patience, then
know that He will reward it without measure.
Ya Sabur, teach me the patience that doesn't
expire. Make me calm when delay tests me and grateful
even as I wait. Grant me patience over my desires
and through my trials and upon the deeds that will
protect me from the fire. Ya Halim, you see my
mistakes and still give me time to fix them. You
watch my slips and still cover them in kindness. Make
me forbearing with those around me and quick to
forgiveness with those who may wrong me.
يَا عَلِيُّ، يَا مُتَعَالِي، raise my heart above
resentment and smallness. Lift my gaze towards the
higher ways that reach You and place my hopes in
what lasts with You. Let my character rise even when
my status falls, for You are higher than everything
that confuses me or defeats me. Lift me above
pettiness, above despair, above sin until my
soul finds its peace in Your
elevation. وَلِلَّهِ الْأَسْمَاءُ
الْحُسْنَى فَادْعُوهُ
بِهَا.