آدم.
آدم. آدم يما.
آدم خالك قالّي إنّك بعدك زعلان.
طب ليش يما مش إحنا تكلّمنا في هالموضوع؟
مش قلت لك يما إنّه كان لازم أسوي هيك؟
بكرة يما بس تكبر، وفي يوم تتزوج ويصير عندك ولاد،
وتحبهم قد ما بحبك،
رح تتأكد إنّي كان لازم أسوي هيك.
طب يلّا قلّي، وقت إيش توصلوا عالمدرسة؟
بالكتير ساعة. ما شاء الله!
في كم من يوم بس صوتك كبران ومتغير؟ أمانة
عليك يا يوسف وقت توصلوا تخبرني وتقولّي إذا
المكان عجب آدم. عايزة أعرف أمانة.
الولد طالع من غزة، يعني هاي بتطلع ديزني لاند.
يما، خالك قالّي إنّه مدرستك قريبة عالبحر. يعني هي عندك
بحر زي هنا، بتروح بتنبسط وبتغير جو. يما أنا
مقدّرة قدّيش إنت زعلان. ترى أنا زعلانة أكتر
منك. علشان إحنا مش مع بعض، يعني أنا هنا
وإنت عند خالك.
بس صدّقني يما، أنا قوّيت قلبي وطلّعتك من غزة
علشان إنت زلمة وجدع وقدّ المسؤولية.
بكرة يما بدي ترفع راسي.
يعني مصر يما ما تسمعني صوتك؟
ومصمم ما تكلّمنيش؟
بدّي ماما! بدّي والله بدّي!
مش سمعاك يا حبيبي ألو؟ ماما؟ ماما؟ الشبكة
الشبكة! ماما ماما! الشبكة! إيش صار بماما؟
الشبكة الشبكة انقطعت! ماما ماما! ماما
ردّي اسمعيني! إنت السبب إنت السبب والله
إنت السبب! وجهتك!
Life gives us temporary companions that are tied to
temporary circumstances: classmates as long as you're
in that school, colleagues as long as you're in that
job, or even when you're passing through, the fellow
passenger on a plane, until you arrive at your
destination. Every companion we lean on is as
temporary as the circumstance that introduced us.
People come and go, while all along we seek reliable
company. Even Adam, alaihis salam, in Jannah wanted a
companion, and Jannah is full of them if we get there.
But in this world, as Jibreel, alaihis salam,
once told the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم: "وَأَحْبِبْ
مَنْ شِئْتَ فَإِنَّكَ مُفَارِقُهُ" "Love whom you will,
for you will be separated." As Ibn Taymiyyah,
rahimahullah, said, "Even your shadow leaves you in
the dark, but the one who created that shadow
remains." And in Du'a as-Safar, we say as we start
our journey,"اللَّهُمَّ أَنْتَ الصَّاحِبُ فِي
السَّفَرِ وَالْخَلِيفَةُ فِي الأَهْلِ", "Oh Allah, You
are my companion in travel and the guardian over my
family." Some of the scholars extended that دعاء to
life itself."اللَّهُمَّ أَنْتَ الصَّاحِبُ فِي سَفَرِ
الحَيَاةِ", "Oh Allah, You are my companion on this
journey of life as a whole." And the Prophet ﷺ said,
«كُنْ فِي الدُّنْيَا كَأَنَّكَ غَرِيبٌ أَوْ عَابِرُ سَبِيلٍ»
Be in this world as if
you're a stranger or a wayfarer. Don't get too
comfortable here, and don't depend too much on anyone
else's companionship. Your only consistent companion
is the one who created every single step of your
journey. And you can instantly summon Him at any
moment by just thinking of Him and remembering Him."
In a Hadith Qudsi, He says, «أَنَا جَلِيسُ مَنْ
ذَكَرَنِي» "I sit with the one who remembers Me." If
you remember Him casually, He's there. If you remember
Him constantly, He's there without interruption. So
you can remember Him like a friend every once in
a while, or constantly like a best friend. But what
do we even mean when we refer to people as
our best friends? That depends on us as individuals,
what we seek from people based upon our
own needs and vulnerabilities. So some people
value companionship more because they hate loneliness.
Others value protection or loyalty because they
fear betrayal most. And for some, it's who you
can immediately turn to for help in need, because the
thought of no one by your side when you fight
your hardest battles is terrifying. And as Al-Imam
al-Ghazali, rahimahullah, said, "Only Allah combines
all of these elements of friendship in one." And for
most people, the first thing they seek in a best
friend is stability. Meaning they're always there and
they're always themselves. So I can count on you to be
reliably kind or reliably helpful, because what
good is your good quality if it's inconsistent? And so
one of the names of Allah is Al-Barr, the constant
source of all good. إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْبَرُّ الرَّحِيمُ
Al-birr, from the same root word, refers to the widest
array of good deeds in Islam. So like when Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala says, وَلَكِنَّ الْبِرَّ مَنْ
آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ وَالْمَلَائِكَةِ
وَالْكِتَابِ وَالنَّبِيِّينَ وَآتَى الْمَالَ عَلَى
حُبِّهِ ذَوِ الْقُرْبَى وَالْيَتَامَى وَالْمَسَاكِينَ
وَابْنَ السَّبِيلِ That birr is that you believe in
Allah, the Last Day, the angels, the book, and the
prophets, and that you give your wealth in spite of
love for it to relatives and orphans and the needy
and the travelers and those who ask, and you free
slaves until the end of this incredible ayah. But the
point is, Bir includes every single good deed from
the smallest kindness to the biggest favors. And
that's why you're supposed to show birr to your
parents, بر الوالدين, and not even say uff to
them. So Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala, He shows you the
full array of kindness as Al-Barr. And another root of
the name Barr is land, which is the opposite of Bahr,
the sea. Think of the imagery of the stable
land versus the tossing sea. You drown if you depend
on others, but you only find firmness in Al-Barr. So
when someone says that so-and-so is like my rock, that
means they're your safest and most loyal companion.
Al-Barr is the most stable friend that you will ever
have. And then beyond that, you don't just have His
constancy, you have His protection. So you have
Al-Wali, the protective friend. Now Allah, in the
general sense, is the Wali of all of the believers.
اللَّهُ وَلِيُّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا. But pay attention to
the sequence in the Qur'an. The ayah before this,
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala says, فَمَنْ يَكْفُرُ
بِالطَّاغُوتِ وَيُؤْمِنُ بِاللَّهِ فَقَدْ اِسْتَمْسَكَ
بِالْعُرْوَةِ الْوِثْقَى لَا انْفِصَامَ لَهَا. Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala says, whoever rejects false gods
and believes in Allah has grasped the most trustworthy
handhold, the one that never snaps. It's as if Allah
is saying that just like you have to shut all
the doors of the devil and focus on walking towards
His door, you have to loosen your grip on what
and who cannot hold you. The only one who can
hold you is the one who sent you that trustworthy
handhold from the heavens, الْعُرْوَةِ الْوُثْقَىٰ, and it
never snaps. See, people will always disappoint you,
sometimes even those closest to you. And this can make
you bitter and distrustful and cynical. So this helps
you to stop being clingy to others or hurt by
rejection, because while the creation can get annoyed
by your attachment, He loves when you cling to Him.
And then how does He honor that? مَنْ عَادَى لِي
وَلِيًّا فَقَدْ آذَنْتُهُ بِالْحَرْبِ, "Whoever takes
that friend of Mine as an enemy, I have declared
war on him." The protective friend will fight for you.
But this type of Wali is different. This is the
special Wali about whom Allah says, "I become the
hearing with which he hears, the sight by which he
sees, the hand with which He grasps, the foot by
which he walks." You see that closeness? The root of
the word Wali is Al-Waliyah, and it refers to the
saddle on the horse's back because it's attached.
Meaning there's no distance between it and the horse.
And the one on top of it is meant to guide
the horse aright. Al-Wali means He guides you
and He guards you at the same time. And He
looks out for your needs even when they conflict with
your wants, which is what a responsible Wali is
supposed to do. And when you earn and embrace that,
your affairs are made easy. And that's why when Yusuf,
alaihis salam, was dying, he said to Allah, أَنْتَ
وَلِيِّي فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالْآخِرَةِ, "You are my Wali
in this life and the next." As much as Yaqub,
alaihis salam, his human Wali loved him, he was taken
from him. And we all separate, at least temporarily, at
death. Think about how the faces were always changing
around Yusuf, alaihis salam. You have a loving father,
then you have jealous brothers, then you have curious
travelers that take him out from the well and sell
him into slavery. Then you have the house of a
master with a lustful wife, and then you have all
of her friends, and then you're in a prison cell
and you have all these other prisoners. And then
you're on the throne and you have all these subjects.
The only companion who was consistent with Yusuf,
alaihis salam, throughout his entire journey was
Al-Wali. And He was guiding and protecting him all
along. But that type of relationship doesn't come
through public posturing. It comes through deep
private devotion. And that's why Imam Hasan al-Basri,
rahimahullah, says, "Don't be a Wali of Allah in
public and then be His aduww, be His enemy in secret.
Spend time with Him in the middle of the night
when no one else is there to witness it.
And in your Witr prayer, you call out to Al-Witr
and you say, وَتَوَلَّنِي فِيمَنْ تَوَلَّيْتَ, "Take
me into Your loving care amongst those who You have
done so with." But how can I be His close
friend when there are so many more fitting people out
there? Wali status is special, but it's not exclusive.
It's an individual friendship that works with millions
of people at a time. And only Allah subhanahu wa
ta'ala can do that. Now there is one higher layer
that only two human beings are known to have ever
been granted. And it's called khullah, the rank of the
Khalil. And this is a rank reserved for prophets.
وَاتَّخَذَ اللَّهُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ خَلِيلًا, Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala took Ibrahim as a Khalil. The
Prophet (SAW) also was taken as a
Khalil by Allah. And because of that, the Prophet,
(SAW) said, "I can't take Abu Bakr as
a Khalil." So while the Prophet (SAW),
could only have one Khalil, Allah can have more than
one Khalil. And even in that is a lesson. That Allah's
friendship capacity isn't like anybody else's.
And Allah's closeness to them doesn't crowd out His
closeness to us. And while we can't be Khalils of
Allah in that prophetic sense, we can walk in the
footsteps of their friendship. And as the 'Ulama say,
"The door of Wilayah is the nearest to the threshold
of Khulla." So Allah is your Sahib, your companion,
not just for the journey, but always. He is Al-Barr,
your stable friend. He is Al-Wali, your protective
friend. And then finally, He is Ar-Rafiq, the gentle
friend. Al-Wali is about letting Allah take hold of
all of your affairs. Ar-Rafiq is primarily how He
takes care of them, similar to Ar-Ra'uf, with a
tenderness that matches His perfection. The name
Ar-Rafiq shows up in the Seerah with two incidents that
both involve our mother 'Aisha, radiAllahu ta'ala anha.
One day, the Prophet, صلى الله عليه وسلم, is walking
and a group from the people of the book say
to the Prophet, صلى الله عليه وسلم, "السلام عليكم."
You know, sometimes we sound like that when we say
Salam. But السلام عليكم means, "May death be upon
you." And they were trying to be cute,right? They'd
fit in that meaning. And the Prophet, صلى الله عليه
وسلم, would simply say, "وعليكم," and upon you. So
if they met Salam, and upon you. And if they
met death, and upon you. But 'Aisha, radiAllahu anha,
she was there and she said, "بل عليكم السام والـ
لعنة," rather, "May death and the curse of Allah be
upon you instead." And the Prophet, صلى الله عليه
وسلم, said to Aisha, radiAllahu ta'ala anha, "Take it
easy, ya Aisha." إِنَّ اللَّهَ رَفِيقٌ يُحِبُّ
الرِّفْقَ, "Allah is gentle and He loves gentleness."
Remember, it's about the how here. And one connection
between Al-Rafiq and Rifq is how you want your
companion to treat you. Rifq doesn't mean a lack of
firmness. It means mercy in how firmness lands. So
Al-Rafiq is the companion whose gentleness gets you
through hard times, even if with hard advice that you
need. He doesn't always remove the mountain, but He
always softens the path for you by His righteousness.
And Al-Rafiq, because of who they are, is someone you
always want to be around. And that's why Rabi'ah ibn
Ka'b al-Aslami, radiAllahu ta'ala anhu, asked for his
one dua to be the Rafiq of the Prophet,
صلى الله عليه وسلم, in Jannah. And just as the last
words of Yusuf, alaihis salam, included, أَنْتَ
وَلِيِّي فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ, the last words of
the Prophet, صلى الله عليه وسلم, on this earth, as
he was in the lap of Aisha, were,
اللَّهُمَّ الرَّفِيقُ الأَعْلَى, "O Allah, the highest
companion." He says this from the beautiful, loving
embrace of Aisha رضي الله عنها from her lap,
sharing a siwak with her. But الرفيق الأعلى is
the greatest companion. I'd still rather be with Him.
Take my soul with gentleness and bring it into Your
glorious presence. Your embrace, that even the loving
embrace of a spouse or parent cannot compare to.
اللهم الرفيق الأعلى, "O Allah, the highest
companion." And this friendship continues past the
funeral. When everyone else's shadow departs again, we
ask Allah اللهم آنس وحشتنا في
القبور, "O Allah, ease our loneliness in the
grave." So Allah sends deeds to keep you company and
angels to reassure you and even relatives to reunite
with at some point. But your ultimate hope is to be
escorted by all of them to your meeting once
again with your loving best friend. ألا إن
أولياء الله لا خوف عليهم ولا هم
يحزنون, "Truly the friends of Allah, there is no
fear upon them, nor will they grieve on the day
of judgment when friends are nowhere to be found, when
crowds are scattering and mothers are fleeing from
their children." Imagine being escorted into the shade
of the throne of Allah while everyone's just trying to
catch their breath. And all of the categories the
Prophet ﷺ mentioned that are shaded
by the throne of Allah are considered categories of
wilayah. But until then, and especially then, direct
your eyes and heart above and say,
اللَّهُمَّ الرَّفِيقَ الْأَعْلَى, "O Allah, the highest
companion. O Allah, the highest companion."
Ya Wali, be my closest friend when the world
drifts away. Guard me with the grip that never slips.
Guide me gently through what
I don't understand and let every loss
lead me back to You.
Ya Barr, keep
me firm on the ground of Your goodness. Make
my faith steady when my heart trembles. Let
me love what brings me to Your stability and make
me patient with what keeps me on its shore.
Ya Rafiq, be
tender with my soul as You unfold Your plan.
Soften the path without removing its purpose.
Make me gentle with others as You've been gentle with
me. And when I am lonely, fill that space
with Your company.
وَلِلَّهِ الْأَسْمَاءُ
الْحُسْنَىٰ فَادْعُوهُ
بها.