What’s up with you and this phone? Or you can no longer sleep 
without the sound of shelling?
I want to check on my son. The phone has been off for hours.
It's not usual for him. This is the first time.
Where's your son? You said you were alone.
I sent him away to his uncle.
On his own?
Yes, on his own.
What was I supposed to do? I wasn't allowed to leave with him. I had to send him alone.
The one I love the most in this world, I had to send him away.
What was I supposed to do?
To keep him? Maybe I should have kept him here.
But if I had kept him, he could have died with the ones who died.
He would have died like his father.
He would have died with his brother or his grandfather.
But maybe I should have kept him with me.
My sweetheart.
I know my son. He can't sleep without me. He can't eat without me.
Maybe I shouldn't have sent him away.
But what was I supposed to do? Adam, my love.
I miss you, my son.
Be patient sister. Take it easy, It's okay.
May God reassure you about him.
Be patient. God willing, it will all be good.
Take it easy sister. Believe me sister.
If anyone loves your son more than you do, It's God.
Whatever God has decreed is beneficial.
And whatever God has written is good.
Be patient. God willing everything will be okay.
Yes, Allah is sufficient. At least your heart
is at ease about him. That he is safe.
That he is away from the bombing. The explosion and the devastation.
Does Allah love everyone? It's a question that makes
people uncomfortable, but the answer is more nuanced
than a simple yes or no. Allah doesn't love the
persistent sinner and the striving good doer in the
same way, but He loves good for you and He
loves repentance from you. So we need to change how
we phrase this. Instead of saying, "Allah loves the
sinners," say, "Allah loves the repenters." That way
you don't belittle the sin or cheapen His love, but
you also don't make a person hopeless thinking they
can never reach Allah's love because of their past
sins. It's your present sins that serve as barriers,
not your past. And if you're repenting, then know
that divine love doesn't expire with failure. Shu'ayb
عليه السلام said to his people, وَاسْتَغْفِرُوا
رَبَّكُمْ ثُمَّ تُوبُوا إِلَيْهِ إِنَّ رَبِّي رَحِيمٌ
وَدُودٌ. "Seek your Lord's forgiveness, then turn back
to Him. Indeed, my Lord is merciful and loving."
Notice how he says, "Rabbakum," your Lord,
and then he says, "Rabbi," my Lord. As if to say,
follow the way I follow, and then you'll
experience His love the way I experience His love,
because it's not for free. And Allah says,
قُلْ إِن كُنتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللَّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي
يُحْبِبْكُمُ اللَّهُ وَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ
Say, "If you truly love Allah, then follow me, and
Allah will love you back and forgive your sins. So
Allah's love is expensive and unique, but not
inaccessible. Allah's name is Al-Wadud, the Loving.
But there's a difference in our tradition between
hubb and wud. Hubb can be a mere feeling of love.
Wud is love translated into action. We're
more used to the word habib, which also means beloved
one. Al-Wadud is the one who loves and acts upon
His love. And when Allah 'azza wa jall loves you,
it never stops at just feelings. He announces that
love throughout the heavens. He calls Jibreel 'alayhis
salam and says, يَا جِبْرِيلُ إِنِّي أُحِبُّ فُلَانًا
I love so-and-so. So love them as well. So Jibreel
loves that person too. And then Jibreel announces it
to the angels in the heavens, and then they love
you too. And then that love descends to the earth.
And it's like the current of love runs from the
throne of Ar-Rahman through the angels of light into
the lives of people you may not have even met yet.
Wud is to love someone and then to constantly
look for them and do what they love for them.
He is Al-Wadud, the one who loves and acts upon
His love. And His messenger is Al-Habib, ﷺ,
the most beloved who was always
seeking His Lord's pleasure. So when you follow
Al-Habib, you enter into the circle of Al-Wadud. And
just like no one else loves you like Allah, no
one else deserves to be loved the way you love Allah.
وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَنْ يَتَّخِذُ مِنْ دُونِ
اللَّهِ أَنْدَادًا يُحِبُّونَهُمْ كَحُبِّ اللَّهِ
From those who take partners beside their Lord are
those who love them the way they should love Allah.
Because that can translate into preference. If you
love someone or something equally to Allah, then you
will conform to what it wants of you. And that's
called shirk al-mahabbah, associating partners in
love, because love itself can become a false idol.
Al-Wadud is willing to love, but you have to be
loyal in that love. And you're not asking Allah for
an empty love. You're asking Him for a transformative
one. Hence the beautiful du'a of the Prophet,
Sallallahu alaihi wasallam, اللهم إني
أَسْأَلُكَ حُبَّكَ وَحُبَّ مَنْ يُحِبُّكَ وَحُبَّ
كُلِّ عَمَلٍ يُقَرِّبُنِي إِلَى حُبِّكَ O Allah, I
ask You for Your love and the love of those
who love You and the love of every deed that brings
me nearer to Your love. سُمِّيَتِ الْمَحَبَّةُ
لِأَنَّهَا تَمْحُو مِنَ الْقَلْبِ مَا سِوَى
الْمَحْبُوبِ It's called mahabbah, love, because it
erases from the heart everything other than the
object of Your love. So His love overwhelms your
heart in a way that makes the hate or the hardship
of this world bearable. إِذَا صَحَّ مِنْكَ
الْوُدُّ فَالْكُلُّ هَيِّنٌ فَكُلُّ الَّذِي فَوْقَ
التُّرَابِ تُرَابٌ If I have Your love, then
everything else is easy because everything above the
dirt is dirt itself. I will never forget this young
girl in France who, when hijab was banned in schools,
she shaved her head. And then as she was being
interviewed, this teenage girl says these beautiful
words, "If being ugly in the sight of the creation
means being beautiful in the sight of the Creator,
then it's worth it." Where do you think that
spiritual clarity comes from? And can you imagine
Al-Wadud looking at her at that moment and then the
conversation that must have happened in the heavens
if she was sincere in what she said? And at
night, when you rise from the comfort of your bed
and maybe even from your beloved spouse, just to
stand before Him, Allah turns to His angels and says,
انظروا إلى عبدي Look at My servant.
ترك فراشه ولحافه من بين أهله وحبه فقام
للصلاة رغبة فيما عندي ومخافة مما عندي. He
left his bed and his comfort and his family and his
beloved yearning for what is with Me and fearing
what is with Me. That's Al-Wadud loving you back,
announcing your name in the heavens for the simplest
act of love on earth. And think about it. If Al-Wadud
loves the repentant sinner so much and rejoices
for him, how much more do you think He
loves the striving worshipper? والله يُحِبُّ
الْمُحْسِنِينَ Allah loves the good-doers, but Allah
Himself is Al-Muhsin, the ultimate good-doer.
Ihsan means doing more than what's expected of you,
outmatching every good. And Allah will never let
you outdo Him in good to Him or anyone else.
So imagine for your half-distracted prayers, your
fasting from just before sunrise to sunset that
sometimes ends with feasting, your charity that
didn't sting too much, He gives you Jannah in return.
He takes your one dollar and He turns it into mountains of
gold. The tasbih that barely cost you a breath earns
you a palace in Jannah. That's Him being Muhsin to
you for what you do between you and Him. And when
it involves being a Muhsin to others, Allah Azza
wa Jalla even rewards more. The Prophet, Sallallahu
alaihi wasallam, said that a man from the nations
before you was called to account in the hereafter.
Nothing good was found with him except that he would
overlook people's loans and he would relieve debt. So
Allah said, نَحْنُ أَحَقُّ بِذَلِكَ مِنْهُ. We are
more worthy of this leniency than him. So overlook
all of his sins. And the Prophet, Sallallahu alaihi
wasallam, said, whoever simply cancels a transaction
with his brother or sister because they regretted it,
so someone agrees to purchase something from you, but
they quickly regret it, and now you're not bound to
release them from that transaction, but you say, you
know what? Don't worry about it. The Prophet,
Sallallahu alaihi wasallam, said, for that, Allah
will cancel his mistakes on the Day of Judgment. So
if it's in the realm of relieving someone or helping
them from a place of Ihsan, Al-Muhsin will meet it
with so much more in this life and the next.
The Prophet, Sallallahu alaihi wasallam, said,
whoever relieves a Muslim of a burden from the
burdens of this world, Allah will relieve him of a
burden from His burdens on the Day of Judgment. And
whoever eases a difficulty in this world, Allah will
grant him ease from a difficulty in this world and in
the Hereafter. And whoever covers the faults of his
Muslim brother or sister, Allah will cover his
faults in this life and in the Hereafter. Allah is
engaged in helping His servant so long as His servant
is engaged in helping his brother. And your ihsan can
sometimes come in the smallest extra details because
al-Muhsin pays attention to the smallest things that
you do for Him and then rewards it unimaginably. Now
imagine something far bigger than those small deeds,
like freeing someone from slavery. The Prophet,
ﷺ, said, "Whoever frees a
believing slave, then Allah will free every part of
his body from the fire. So the same way that you
freed that person from captivity, Allah frees you
from eternal captivity. Now this ihsan isn't even
limited to acts of kindness to humans. Remember that
lifelong sinner who gave water to a dog and Allah
forgave them for all of their sins? But for what?
You gave water to a dog, not Allah. But Allah
is grateful to you for taking care of one of His
creation with the blessing that He provided for
you in the first place. And this unveils the next
layer. Allah is Shākir, appreciative, just as
He is Ghafūr, forgiving, and He has the capacity of
forgiveness and gratitude that is unimaginable. And
for the smallest single act of kindness, He rewards
in the most incredible of ways. But His name is
also ash-Shakūr, the most appreciative. And just as
al-Ghafūr forgives beyond measure, ash-Shakūr rewards
beyond measure. Now what's the difference between
shukr and ihsān? Ihsān is more general in that you
may show it to someone who did nothing for you,
like overlooking a shortcoming or holding a door for
a stranger or picking up a piece of garbage from
in front of someone's house. But shukr is
specifically how you show appreciation for good. So
al-muhsin won't be outmatched in the extra effort
that goes beyond what's deserved. And ash-Shakūr will
not be outmatched in thanking someone for any good
that they put forth. And as He appreciates even your
smallest deed, think about how many humans deny the
most significant good done to them. إِنَّا
هَدَيْنَاهُ السَّبِيلَ إِمَّا شَاكِرًا وَإِمَّا
كَفُورًا. Verily, We have guided him to the path,
either he is shākir, grateful, or intensely
ungrateful. Iblīs said, وَلَا تَجِدُ أَكْثَرَهُمْ
شَاكِرِينَ. And you will find that the majority of
them are indeed ungrateful. And Iblis specifically
said that he could disconnect you from prayer by
making you ungrateful. Think about it. People are not
willing to pray five times a day. You realize how
ungrateful that is to Allah? He provides for you day
and night, and you can't even spare a few minutes
for Him to say thank you. And He used the term
shakir, basic gratitude to describe human
beings, not even shakoor, which is the higher, more
intensive form. At least let them be shakir and not
kafoor, not intensely ungrateful. But then look at the
Prophet, Sallallahu alaihi wasallam, when he was
asked why he prays not just five times a day,
but so much extra at night that his feet swell up.
And the Prophet, Sallallahu alaihi wasallam, has
already been forgiven for all of his sins. And he
replied, ﷺ, أَفَلَا أَكُونُ
عَبْدًا شَكُورًا Shall I not be an extremely grateful
servant? He wanted to do even more. And Allah says,
لَئِن شَكَرْتُمْ لَأَزِيدَنَّكُمْ If you are
grateful, then I will increase you even more. And
there's another thing about being grateful to Him.
When you realize His blessings upon you, you're
increased in your love towards Him. And the Prophet,
Sallallahu alaihi wasallam, said, أَحِبُّوا اللَّهَ
أَحِبُّوا اللَّهَ لِمَا يَغْدُوكُمْ مِنْ نِعَمِهِ Love Allah for the
blessings that He provides for you. But here's the
thing. Those blessings can be provided out of love
for you or despite His not loving you. Just like
we said about divine aid and nasr. The Prophet,
Sallallahu alaihi wasallam, said, إِنَّ اللَّهَ
يُعْطِي الدُّنْيَا لِمَنْ يُحِبُّ وَمَنْ لَا يُحِبُّ
وَلَا يُعْطِي الْإِيمَانَ إِلَّا مَنْ أَحَبَّ Allah
gives of this world to those He loves and those
He doesn't love. But He only gives iman, faith, to
those whom He loves. He begins by loving you enough
to guide you. And then He loves you again when
you love Him back through repentance. And then He
loves you most when gratitude transforms your worship
from bare minimum obligation to extra loving
devotion. And the extra He may give you may not
just be extra reward, but extra in regards to your
relationship with Him.
يَا وَدُودُ Love me even after
I falter, and let Your love reach me through
every mercy I overlook. Teach me to love
You more than what You give, and to find
sweetness in every test that draws me
closer to Your love. Announce
Your love for me in the heavens until I
hear that announcement myself in paradise.
Surround me with it in everything around me, and let
me feel it deep inside myself. يَا مُحْسِنُ
You perfect everything You touch.
Make me one of those who do good because You
do good. Guide me to the ways of good in
every single one of my dealings. Then let my deeds
of excellence to others be a reflection
of Your unmatched perfection.
يَا شَكُورُ For every small effort
I make, reward me beyond measure. Let me
never grow tired of thanking You and never
forget that gratitude itself is a gift from You.
Accept from me what is broken and multiply it
until it becomes
whole. وَلِلَّهِ الْأَسْمَاءُ
الْحُسْنَىٰ فَادْعُوهُ
بِهَا.