Mom, Mom, Mom, I finished it!
I know you're smarter than me since your grandfather
brought it to me, when I was about your age.
To this day, I haven't figured out how to solve it.
Adam, I want to tell you something.
But before you tell me, what's the story of this scar
on your hands? I told you. No, tell me
from the start, what were you playing? What happened?
Exactly what happened? I don't really remember, you know
your uncle was very naughty when he was young.
So, what did you want to tell me?
I want you to promise me, promise not to be mad at me.
I've never been mad at you.
I know, you never have, but in the future,
no matter what happens, promise not to be mad at me.
You always make me promise things. How are you so sure
that I'll keep my word? Because
I'm sure and I know you're a man, and a man keeps
his promise and his word. Okay, I promise. But Mom,
what did you want to tell me?
Your uncle Youssef and I
arranged for you to leave Gaza.
What? How? How can I leave Gaza?
What do you mean? How can I leave Gaza? Mom, how
can I leave Gaza without you? No, Mom... it's better.
What do you mean? How can I leave Gaza?
Without you? No, Mom. This is better, Adam.
Go live with your uncle. Who will stay and protect you?
God is the protector. Mom, I can't do it without you.
I can't. Adam, I just said
that you are a man. No, Mom, it won't work.
What can we do? These are the circumstances.
I can't leave or live without you, Mom. No, Mom.
Mom, I can't live without you.
I can't live without you, Mom.
No, Mom.
I can't live without you.
Salah isn't meant to be a robotic ritual. It's your
human orientation and your daily act of theology in
motion. You can interact with the world while
remembering Allah only so much, meaning yes, you
should try to make dhikr even in conversation and see
deeper meanings in everything happening around
you. But at some point, you have to completely put
the world on pause and silence. Just like how in
Ramadan you have to completely pause from food and
drink to feed the soul and then recast those blessings
once again in light of the greater purpose that you're
discovering. With Salah, you have to entirely pause
from the dunya itself and everybody in it so that you
can focus solely on Allah and the Hereafter. Fasting
empties the body so that the soul can breathe. Prayer
empties the schedule so the heart can remember
because a life without prayer is a life without
remembering Allah. And these five prayers are
distributed across the day so you never drown
in heedlessness. It's a blessing for your schedule
in that it's not a huge time commitment at any one
point of the day, but something you can step away
for easily because it's only a matter of minutes
at a time. But more than that, it's a blessing for
your soul because it stops you from suffocating from
worldly matters without a mandatory spiritual break.
So it's reasonable and rejuvenating. As the scholars
say, He divided the day between your needs and your
meeting with Him so that you never pass through a
day without a portion of the divine, but you also
don't feel overburdened by Him. And the Prophet
was the most present of people. He
gave everyone in his presence his full attention,
though Allah was never absent from his heart. But when
the time for prayer would come, he would jump up
to pray. That's prayer, turning total presence with
creation into total presence with the Creator. And the
more you know Allah, the more you long for those
just like you can't wait for that phone call
from your beloved. Comfort us with it, Bilal.
I need a break from the world
to just focus on its Creator. And glory to God,
this moment of presence is universal. I always think
about it when I walk into an airport prayer room.
You'll find travelers from every corner of earth,
different languages, heading to different places,
but suddenly they're all in the same direction,
pausing their worldly routes to focus
on the Creator of the world. The call is made
and everyone stops mid-journey, shoulder to shoulder,
hearts aligned to one qiblah. Within a few hours,
we're all thousands of miles away from each other.
A wealthy businessman in transit, a refugee seeing
an airport for the first time yet knows to find
the prayer area as a priority, a neurodivergent child
whispering whatever he can remember of God's
worship. Five times a day, the entire community
synchronizes its heartbeat. That's the universality
of servitude, when every believer steps out of
mechanical motion and into spiritual meaning.
There's a community visual of this in Mecca. Everyone
from different parts of the world, different
backgrounds, physically removing themselves from every
other part of the earth and aligning themselves to the
One who is worth more than everything they left
behind. Imagine Salah as a visual story in
your own daily life, the majesty of Allah's names
unfolding through your every posture. You stand
before Al-Kabir, bow to Al-Azim, fall before
Al-A'la, and then rise with Al-Majid. It starts with
Allah's name, Al-Kabir, the Greatest. Every meeting
with Allah begins with Allahu Akbar. Scholars
call it Takbiratul Ihram, the sanctifying takbir,
just like for one in Umrah or Hajj. It locks
the door of the world behind you as you approach
Allah with nothing but a focus on Him. Prayer is
not an interruption of life's work. It's where you
find life's real rest. Al-Kabir means the One who
surpasses all comparison, whose greatness
renders everything else small. When you raise your
hands and say Allahu Akbar, you're not simply
announcing prayer, you're declaring independence from
everything lesser. Takbiratul Ihram literally means
that you forbid everything else from your attention.
This takbir is your renunciation of distraction, that
nothing I fear or desire is greater than Him. And
whoever perceives His greatness truly finds that all
greatness besides Him is just a delusion. As Imam
As Imam al-Ghazali said, "And every
great thing compared to Him is small," and
everything compared to Al-Kabir is small. And
that's why Allah pairs His names Al-Ali, Al-Kabir,
together because His loftiness safeguards His
greatness from tyranny. "Indeed Allah is High, Great,"
so "Allah is Greater" becomes your first
liberation. And every "Allah is Greater" you say in
prayer cuts another leash of this world, the leash of
fear or false hopes or useless comparisons or
temporary conflicts or even inflated ego. Allah is
greater than all of that. And you begin your dialogue
with Allah having emptied the heart of every other
audience. And then you enter into bowing, which is
the ultimate posture of humility, bending the spine
before the One who never bends. "Glory be to
my Lord, the Magnificent,"
Allah is Al-Azim, the Magnificent. And the word shares
the root of Al-Azm, which are bones, the structural
support of the body. And the scholars explain that
this signifies firmness that doesn't collapse. So
Allah's greatness is the firmness of reality itself. All
creation stands because He willed it to stand and bows
when He tells it to bow. And that's why in
the Qur'an, Al-Azim often appears in context of stability
and awe. Exalt your Lord, the Great.
Glorify the name of your Lord, the Magnificent. When
this verse was revealed, the Prophet
said to the companions, make this in your ruku‘.
He taught them to connect bodily humility to the
remembrance of divine immensity. And the Quran also
uses ‘Azim to describe someone's moral
collapse. Indeed, he did not believe in Allah,
the Most Great. Verily he did not believe in Allah, the
Magnificent. As the scholars say that whoever does not
magnify Allah will inevitably magnify something else.
And man bows to what he magnifies, and it fails
him on the day of judgment if it's anything but Allah.
So ruku‘ is rehab. You bend your back not
to the world's weight, but to the One who carries
all of its weight. So just as Allah condemned the
moral collapse of a person who refuses to acknowledge
al-‘Azim, Allah says just a few ayahs later that if you
want to find moral clarity and spiritual safety
and stability, Exalt your Lord, the Great.
then glorify the name of your Lord, the Magnificent.
And if you think about yourself in ruku‘, it's when
you're physically actually in your most unstable
position. And that's the entire point. But even when
you're not in ruku‘, you have no stability without
Him. Which is why when the Prophet,
was distressed, he would say, "There is
no god but Allah, the Great, the Forbearing," "There is
no god but Allah, Lord of the Great
Throne," none has the right to be worshipped but Allah,
the Magnificent, the Forbearing. None has the right to
be worshipped but Allah, the Lord of the Magnificent
Throne. His prayer of anguish begins with "Great" because
every destabilizing problem shrinks when you remember
it beside that word. And Imam Al-Ghazali
says, "And everything besides Him is trivial," and every
thing next to the Magnificent is trivial. The Prophet
also taught that the most beloved of speech
to Allah are four phrases: Glory be to Allah,
praise be to Allah, no god but Allah, Allah is Greatest.
But the heaviest on the scale are the two that combine
glorifying His praise and His
magnificence. "Glory and praise be to Allah,"
"Glory be to Allah the Magnificent," light on the tongue,
heavy on the scale, beloved to the Merciful. So when you
bend your back and affirm His greatness, you're not just
humbling yourself, but you're belittling everything that
threatens to rock your world. And then you fall to
the ground in prostration. This is the ultimate paradox
of greatness. Your lowest posture is your highest
station. The Prophet said, "The closest a servant is...
"The servant is closest to his Lord in prostration."
to his Lord is while he is in sujood. The forehead
touches the earth that it was made from. And through
that humility, your soul ascends past the boundaries
even of this universe. Prayer is the believer's ascent
Salah is the ascent of the believer. Just
like the Prophet was brought to
Allah in body and soul to be given its command,
your soul is brought to Him in salah and in
sujood to be given its elevation and answered
supplication. So increase in your du'a there because
your Lord can give you what no one else can.
And you don't have to posture to try to impress
anyone else. You prostrate to Al-A'la to show that
you're submitting. Glory be to my Lord, the Most High,
Glory be to my Lord, the Most High. Allah's name
is Al-A'la, the One who is the Most High, higher
than everything else, and from whom all highness is
found. So with Al-A'la, as your body goes to the
lowest point, your tongue affirms His highness and
your entire rank rises. And that's not irony, it's
spiritual alignment. Pharaoh said, "I am
your most exalted lord," with his
chest out proud. And then Allah drowned him and
disparaged him. And the Qur'an instructs, "Exalt..."
"The name of your Lord, the Most High," and when that
revealed, the Prophet said,
include this in your sujud. With each sajdah, your
own arrogance and any other concerns you have are dead
on contact with the ground as your heart feels alive.
Your brain is beneath your heart, and that's the only
position that it happens. You can't see anything
because of where you are. Yet somehow the release
valve is at its max. And in that quiet, whether
it's on a hospital floor or in an airport corner
or in the ashes of Gaza, we all meet the same
Al-A'la that the angels glorify throughout the
heavens. The dust beneath every believer's forehead
connects them all in the same submission. And then
finally you rise to greet Al-Majid. Al-Majid is the
glorious. And if you look at where you are in
salah, the journey from standing to bowing to
prostrating, they all emptied you of your lower self
and the sins came falling off of you in every
position. So now as you rise to Al-Majid, you greet
Him with a ceremonial greeting: "All greetings are for
Allah, and prayers and goodness," you give Allah your
praise and your purest deeds. You send salam on the
Prophet, and on all the believers
of every time and space that shared in the same salah.
You bear witness again to the oneness of Allah
and the prophethood of the Prophet,
before sending prayers upon him and his family and
Ibrahim and his family. Then you say, "Indeed You are
Praiseworthy, Glorious," Surely You are Praiseworthy.
Allah uses this name al-Majid only with glorious
things. Honorable Owner of the Throne,
glorious throne. And He calls the Quran
itself, "Glorious Quran," because His speech carries
His glorious word. Al-Majid is one of those names of
Allah that the scholars mention contains multiple
meanings. So it contains expansive generosity, His
expansive generosity. And then it contains great
bounty, His great bounty. And then it contains His
irresistible majesty, His overwhelming majesty. So
because it's at the end of the prayer, which contains
all of the elements of things you'll be appealing
to regarding His greatness, you end with that name,
Al-Majid. And then Imam Ibn al-Qayyim, he
says that Al-Majid is the One whose perfection is vast
and whose giving is continuous. So in Surah al-Fatihah,
when you say, Sovereign of the Day of Recompense,
the King and the owner of the Day
of Judgment, Allah responds and
says, "My servant has extolled Me," My servant has
glory. And one of the implications of that is that
once you recognize who He is, His glory becomes far
too great to ignore. And glory to God, when you know
The All-Glorious, everything else seems so mediocre.
When you return from prayer, you see His glory through
the glamour of the world constantly, and He
dominates your heart. And the trick of prayer
is not just to enter with an acknowledgment
that God is greater, but to live outside
of prayer in a way that represents that reality.
That's Al-Majid. He's so glorious that everything else
seems too lowly now unless it somehow involves the
remembrance of Him. The prayer's choreography mirrors
your spiritual evolution. Al-Kabir, God is greater,
teaches you to detach from the lesser. Al-Azim,
"Glory to my Lord the Great," teaches you firmness in
the greater. Al-A'la, "Glory to my Lord the Highest,"
teaches you to ascend through surrender. Al-Majid,
"You are Praiseworthy, Glorious," teaches you honor
by the One you truly glorify. And in prayer, you're not
just living through His names. You're dressing your
entire existence in those names. Your body, heart,
mind, and soul are all refueling. You're letting His
greatness overwhelm you in a way that tells you that
all you've been seeking this entire time, even in
regards to your worldly affairs, is nothing but His grace.
O Most Great, how small I am before You. Let
humility settle where arrogance once lived. Remind me
that greatness belongs only to You and can only be
realized through You. Shut the doors to what
diminishes me and guide my devotion to what
fills me through You. O Magnificent,
My Lord of might without measure. Make
my reverence for You heavier than any fear of
creation. Let my heart bow before You long before my
body does. And let my most unstable positions be
stilled by my trust in You. O Most High, You are
higher than every desire I taste. Lift
me from the illusions of this world and make
my ambitions worthy of Your nearness. Let my soul rise
to You with sincerity and longing until I meet You
in the highest of places. O Most Glorious, the glorious
whose greatness humbles all glory. Honor
me by keeping me close. Let my meeting with
You there be an extension of my meetings with You
here. Make my remembrance of You my greatest title and
my servitude to You my highest
rank. To Allah belong the most
beautiful names, so call upon Him
by them.