Adam, don't go long before you visit.
And I will make
your favorite knafeh. It won't be like
your mom's, of course, but I
I will do my best, I promise.
Sandra was very lucky to have 
a mother like you. 
Thank you.
How can I ever repay you for what you have done
for us? 575 bucks.
120 for the troubles
And the rest for
the bike? O-okay.
Just don't be a
stranger. Thank you.
Thank you for everything.
Your hands come back down, feeling empty even as your
heart aches with what you asked for, and you wonder
if the silence is an answer in itself. Or worse,
you start doubting the one that you asked. What if I
told you that the one who pardons your past
is the same one who is too shy to turn you
away when you ask about your future? Salman
al-Farsi narrates that the
Prophet said,
Your Lord is shy and generous. He is shy when His
servant raises his hands to Him to return them
empty. Indeed, your Lord is Hayy, shy, and Kareem,
generous. He is shy when His servant raises his
hands to Him to return them back empty.
That shyness, in a manner befitting His Majesty,
is not like our shyness. You see,
there's a blameworthy shyness, when you should
do the right thing but don't. And then there's
a praiseworthy shyness. One shyness causes you
to shrink from doing right out of fear of others.
The other shyness overflows in doing good out of
love for them. Scholars say Allah's shyness
is not of weakness. It is perfection, not deficiency.
It is the shyness of magnanimity. What does that
even mean? There's a shyness that causes you to
withdraw when you encounter a situation you don't
feel capable of handling. And then there's a shyness
when someone asks you for something you can't refuse.
So you do the noble thing and you give anyway.
Allah is al-Hayy, the Shy. And His shyness
is generosity in giving, not reluctance in asking.
Allah is too noble and shy for you to go to His door
and for Him not to put anything in your hands.
But al-Hayy is also al-Hakim. So with that shyness
His wisdom means He still won't give you
what hurts you. If someone came to your door
and pointed to something they thought was food,
but it was rotten, knowing it's rotten will
stop you from giving it, and you'll say,
"No, you don't really want that because it'll
actually make you sick." But if you're also a more
noble person, you'll say, "Wait, let me see what else
I have to give you that's actually better than this."
The Modest, Generous One is shy when you ask, but He
gives you only what's best for you. Sometimes a delay
or a redirection or something better than what you
asked for originally. But He never sends
your hands back empty. Especially when you ask
for forgiveness. The Prophet said,
"Don't say 'if You want,' just
say, 'O Allah, forgive me, pardon me.'" And He
will be too shy not to. And by the way, there
is no redirection in repentance. You spent
Ramadan trying, and you fell short sometimes, and you
begged Him for one night for forgiveness. And through
that one night, He forgave it all because He is
too generous and too shy to reject you. That is Al-Hayy.
He leaves you satisfied and maybe even shy
before Him because of how much He gave you, though
You know you don't deserve it. So a person
might say, "Glory be to God, I feel so shy, O
God, that after all this, You treated me this way.
But I also don't want to say, 'Can you stop now?'
because I still need You and always will." Now I
was thinking about the person who narrates this
hadith, Salman al-Farsi,
whose entire life probably felt like a string of
unanswered questions. A boy searching for truth, then
imprisoned by his father, then betrayed by his
spiritual leader, then jumping countries to find
truth, only to be kidnapped and sold into slavery,
then passed from one master to another, then holding
onto descriptions of a Prophet
that a monk in the far north once told him
would come, but he probably thinks he'll never meet
him anymore, only to find himself after all the
deserts and caravans in a tree in Quba. And he
finally meets the Prophet in
Medina and enters into Islam and becomes one of his
dearest companions. And now he could look back and
see it. Just like for Yusuf, al-Latif had been
bringing it all together for him his entire life.
Every delay was just a redirection. Every closed door
was actually protection. Every moment of his own
confusion was actually divine coordination. Then he
finds himself with the Messenger of Allah
and the Muslims digging a trench to survive
a genocide. And the trench was his suggestion. And in
that trench, the Prophet strikes a
stone, and the light shines to where his journey
started, in Persia. And then years later, Allah sends
him back to Persia, but this time not as a
slave or even as a worshiper, but as its leader.
And it's like he could suddenly see how every
scattered year of his life had been a thread being
woven into a perfect story. But I want you to imagine
being in his place, making du'a between all
these journeys and captivity and everything else.
Isn't it amazing that He's the one that the Prophet
teaches about al-Hayy, who never
once turns him away when he raises his hands? Allah
was shy, Salman, but He had a plan for
you all along. And that brings us to His name,
al-Jami': the one who gathers what life has
scattered. Whether it's your scattered hopes or your
scattered story or your scattered self or your
scattered efforts or your scattered du'as, all the
scattered years that don't seem to add up to
anything, but al-Jami' is the one who gathers it all.
On Judgment Day, He will gather all of
humanity, gathering your scattered deeds into
one book. And then here, He gathers your scattered
life experiences into a single story that seems to
only make sense at the end. Sometimes it looks like
the sinner who went far but came back to Allah
and with a soft heart took courageous stances that
the lifelong masjid-goer couldn't bear. Sometimes
it's the agnostic who learns about Allah and not
only climbs out of their own confusion, but goes on
to become an imam with clarity. Sometimes it looks
like a kid who grows up in broken homes and later
becomes the counselor who heals other broken homes.
Sometimes it's a painful divorce that becomes
the mercy leading two people to the spouses that
they were always meant to protect and be protected
by. So the name you're longing for that brings
everything full circle at some point, in this
life or the next, is al-Jami': Our Lord, surely You
will gather the people for a Day about which there is
no doubt. Indeed, Allah does not fail in His promise.
Our Lord, surely You will gather the people for a Day
about which there is no doubt. Indeed, Allah never
breaks His promise. He calls it Yawm al-Jam': the Day
of Gathering. There is no doubt about it.
The Day He will gather you for the Day of Gathering.
That is the Day of Loss and Gain. On that day, He will
gather you and show you what was missing from view
while you were on this earth. The day when every
question finds its answer, when every hardship
reveals its hidden mercy, and when every prayer
spared until that day is rewarded within the
capacity of the 99 portions of mercy He didn't
let us experience on this earth. Imagine that great
gathering of the Day of Judgment and every soul that
ever lived standing in line, and the books are being
distributed. Your book, compiled by the Gatherer, who
gathered every deed that you thought was lost and
every tear that you thought went unnoticed. And then
you open it and you see the Ramadan that you
thought you wasted, but it's recorded in full.
The night that you cried when no one else saw
you written in light on your page. The day that you
smiled at someone even though you were hurting
inside. All there gathered and waiting for you to be
rewarded or to be forgiven for. But what about the
world after you leave it? Allah is the Gatherer, but
He's also the Inheritor. What the Gatherer gathers
for you in this life, Allah preserves for you beyond
it. Even after you're gone, when your name has faded
from people's prayers and no one remembers the good
you did, al-Warith still keeps your record open
before He brings it back, and al-Jami‘ gathers it all
together again. He brings it all back together
in the hereafter, but what about here after you're
gone? What if people won't pray for you by
name because they've already forgotten you? But
Allah preserves everything you did, even if only
He knows it. And what continues to benefit the
world from you, even if people don't realize it?
Someone decades from now who doesn't know that you
left that benefit for them, or that you
introduced their parents to each other, or maybe you
even saved one of them from ruin in a
dark time. Or maybe you donated what was needed to
finish off that last fundraiser. Or maybe the
smallest act of kindness that even you didn't think
much of changed someone else's life. Allah writes
down the ongoing charity for you, even if the
beneficiaries don't know who you are. And then
al-Jami‘ brings you and that person back at the same
time before Him on the Day of Judgment,
and they testify for you, even though they
didn't know you or know that the good was from
you in the first place. Think about how many of
The Sahaba we don't know, but we pray for
all of those who preceded us in faith. Those who
preceded us in faith. We may be general with our
du'a, but al-Warith maintains the specifics. And
al-Jami' brings all the scattered pieces and puts the
greatest puzzle ever back together in an instant.
"To Allah belongs the heritage of the heavens..."
"...and the earth." It won't be in a museum.
It will be in His record, and it will be
your chapter in His story.
History preserved. We worry so much about legacy.
Will anyone remember me? Will anything I did matter?
And the answer is yes, but not because your name
will trend on people's tongues, but because al-Warith
never forgets. Your legacy isn't with people who
forget. It's with the One who never does.
"What you have runs out, and what is with Allah..."
"...is everlasting." What you have runs out,
and what is with Allah is everlasting.
The most beautiful invocation of this name
was on the tongue of a prophet who had no one
left to carry his memory in this world. And Zechariah,
when he called to his Lord, "My Lord, do not leave me
alone, while You are the best of inheritors."
When Zechariah called to his Lord and said, "My Lord,"
me alone, and You are the best of inheritors."
Zakariya saw the Children of Israel about to
collapse and saw no way forward for his people.
But today we say his name. More importantly than
us saying his name, Allah recognized his prayer, and
Allah never forgot him. Allah gathered everything
that he put forth. But you stand at the door
of this world where everything feels temporary,
people come and go, and nothing seems to last.
On the other side of this door is the Hereafter,
where everything you lost for His sake is
actually waiting for you, preserved. For the people
of Gaza, that is finding each other again when Allah
gathers them as martyrs. And maybe us with them
as well, because even though they were just on our
phones, they landed so deeply in our hearts.
For the people of Sudan and all the other unseen
oppressed ones whose stories seem lost in the
headlines, Allah gathers them with those they belong
with and in places only He owns where they can
be given their full worth. The door of this world
keeps closing one day and one breath
at a time. And the door of the next keeps opening.
And al-Warith is the one who preserves what
you think is lost by inheriting your good deeds when
you can no longer do them. He inherits your legacy
when your name is no longer mentioned. He inherits
your pain when your tears have dried. And He keeps
it all until the day you meet Him, and He
returns it to you multiplied. None of this affects
Him in any way, but none of it escapes His
knowledge and all that He will gather and present on
that day. And with Allah is the best return. To Him
is the most beautiful return.
Ya Hayy, You are too shy to turn away these
hands. How many times have I asked with nothing
worthy in return, and yet You still answered in a
way that left me in awe? Forgive me for my
mountains of fault for just a droplet of Your mercy,
and give me more than I dare to ask because of Your
generosity. Ya Jami', gather the pieces
of my heart that this world has broken,
or perhaps I myself have broken. Unite
what distance and time have separated. Bring
together my past and my purpose, my loved ones, and
the reward that You've promised. Until we meet again
under the shade of Your throne. And Ya Warith, as
everything returns to You, what fades from me remains
preserved with You. Keep my deeds when I am gone
and let them grow, and my legacy when I'm forgotten,
as long as not by You. Take my soul with
Your pleasure and leave only what You will love to
return to me for when I meet
You. And to Allah belong the names
most beautiful, so call Him
by them.