Does it look any hopeful now, Nour?
Any signal?
Yeah, I don't think so either.
Yeah, I give up.
This thing is not going anywhere.
Adam, I think we— Adam!
Where does the kid keep going? Adam!
I'm going to kill this kid. Adam!
آه. لقط؟ شكلي لقط. أه،
أه! لقط، لقط!
Adam! Adam! Oh, look at that.
Seems like we got some trouble here.
Think about human kings. The more power a human being
has, the more corrupt he tends to become. إِنَّ الْمُلُوكَ إِذَا
دَخَلُوا قَرْيَةً أَفْسَدُوهَا. When kings enter a city, they
corrupt it. Because power almost always comes with
arrogance. And that's not just true for kings on
thrones. But any authority that feels unchecked and
forgets who put them in that position in the first
place is prone to corruption. And that's why Umar ibn
al-Khattab رضي الله تعالى عنه, who was humbled by his
position, once asked Salman رضي الله عنه, "Ya Salman, am
I a king or a khalifa?" He said, "If you take
even a single dirham from the people's wealth and
misplace it, then you're a king, not a khalifa." And
Umar, رضي الله عنه, wept out of fear of Allah.
And even the Prophet, صلى الله عليه وسلم on the day
of the conquest of Mecca, a man comes to him
trembling as he approaches him. So the Prophet,
صلى الله عليه وسلم says to him, "Relax, هوّن عليك. For"
فإني لست بملك. I'm not a king. I'm just the son of a woman
from Mecca who used to eat dry meat." So who
is الملك؟ المالك، المليك. And what's the
difference between these three names? It all starts with
الملك, from which the other names unfold. And the
Quran envelopes your life with the parallel of Rabb and
Malik. So you open with رب العالمين، مالك يوم الدين
and you close with رب الناس، ملك الناس. So the scholars
point out that Rabb usually addresses the personal
aspects of lordship. And Malik addresses the public
aspects of authority. The merciful master commands
for the interests of the individual, while the mighty
king legislates for the welfare of the many. And
the king of the world still has time to be
your loving master in the most personal sense. So both
praise and protection meet under the same throne of
ar-Rahman. Allah says, "ذلكم الله ربكم له الملك"
"That is your Lord. To Him belongs the ownership of
all." Imagine if you were to walk into the palace
grounds of a king. How would you behave? You would
be grateful to be there, careful to follow the rules,
respectful of what the king wants. Here you pledge
allegiance to that king every morning, every
night."أصبحنا وأصبح الملك لله" "We have entered
the morning and the entire kingdom belongs to Allah."
Then in the evening,"أمسينا وأمسى الملك لله" "We
have entered the night and the entire kingdom belongs to
Allah.""والحمد لله" "And all praise belongs to Him." You
glorify His power and His praise. So who is this king?
Firstly, he's a king who didn't need you to recognize
him. Al-Malik means the king who needs no validation.
He already declared himself the king."هو
الله الذي لا إله إلا هو" al-Malik. No one placed
a crown on him. No one voted him in. No one
can vote him out. His kingship is not acquired
nor inherited. It simply is and always will be. Every
other throne in history was only borrowed for a time.
And think about Fir'awn standing proudly before his
people, even carving himself into pyramids, only for
Allah to drown him and preserve his rotten corpse as
a warning to every Fir'awn wannabe after him. And look
at all the arrogant emperors and empires now returned to
dirt, only to be artifacts of evil."أفلم يسيروا في الأرض
فينظروا كيف كان عاقبة الذين من قبلهم" "Have they not
traveled through the earth and seen what became of those
before them?" The lesson remains, but the kings are
gone. And on the Day of Judgment, He will declare, "أنا
الملك." "I am the King." Where are the kings of
the world? Now note that He's always the King. But on
the Day of Judgment, it's particularly significant.
Which brings us to the next name, "مَالِكِ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ." "Owner
of the Day of Judgment." Yawm ad-Din is Yawm ad-Dain,
the day of debt. When debts are paid, when titles
expire, when heads bow and hearts sink, and all private
claims are put on display in this one big public
tribunal, the kings who once ruled nations will stand as
servants. The billionaires who thought they owned the
world will realize they actually own nothing at all. And
some recitations are مَلِكِ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ, King of the Day
of Judgment. Others are مَالِكِ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ, owner of the
Day of Judgment. Because He owns that day and He
is the king over its proceedings and people. And notice
how Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala says right before
that, "الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ." So that you don't mistake Him for
a harsh king. And the Day of Judgment is the day
when you want Him to be most merciful. But of course,
He's not just مَالِكِ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ. One of His
names is also مَالِكُ الْمُلْكِ, the owner of all
things owned. He just specified the Day of Judgment
first to make that your focus when you read every
other verse of the Quran. Because just like His mercy
frames every other name of His, the day of judgment
should frame every other station of your
existence."تبارك الذي بيده الملك""وهو على كل شيء قدير"
الذي خلق الموت والحياة He created
and He owns everything that exists, including
death and life. And He starts with death to remind
you that you didn't even own your existence. And so when
He reclaims what was always His, even our precious
loved ones. The Prophet, صلى الله عليه وسلم taught us
to say,"لله ما أخذ وله ما أعطى" "To Him
belongs what He took and what He gave." Even your
loved ones are just borrowed gifts from Allah. And He
reminds us to say at all times,"لله ملك السماوات والأرض"
"To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the
earth." If you don't truly own yourself, then you
certainly don't own anything else. You're renting even
what you think you're owning. And one day the owner
will call back what was always His."قل اللهم مالك الملك
تؤتي الملك من تشاء وتنزع الملك ممن تشاء" Say, "O
Allah, owner of all dominion, You give kingdom to whom
You will and You take it away from whom You
will." So al-Malik tells you who He is. al-Malik
tells you what He owns, which is everything.
And when you trust His ownership, He takes you to
another level to trust His execution as well. Which
brings us to the rarest name, al-Malik, which means the
inevitable King, whose decree no one escapes. al-Malik
adds to the notion of power, the power of execution."إن
المتقين في جنات ونهر في مقعد صدق عند مليك مقتدر"
"The righteous will be in gardens and rivers,
seated in a position of honor with a king who
has absolute power." Pay attention. al-Malik is the King
who needs no validation. al-Malik is the King who
owns all possessions. al-Malik is the King who then
executes His decree with no fear of ever losing power.
Because no coup or rebellion is ever possible with Him.
So when you realize Allah is al-Malik, you stop
measuring your safety by proximity to people and start
measuring it solely by proximity to Him. But that's when
you witness His power. How about when you feel His
majesty? Which brings us to the last name, al-Jalil, His
majesty. You see, you can recognize the power of a
king in front of you, but feel no real reverence
in your heart. But if they possess this quality of
al-Jalal as well, then you're overwhelmed by their
presence. So Jalal, as the scholars explain, speaks to
the internal condition caused by the King in His
subjects. And when do you most feel that majesty of
Allah? It's after Salah, where you've stood in awe of Him.
And then you say,"تباركت يا ذا الجلال والإكرام" But you
know the Prophet ﷺ, he said, "ألظوا
بيا ذا الجلال والإكرام." Frequently say, يا ذا الجلال
والإكرام, "O possessor of majesty and honor." But His
Jalal is a majesty that humbles, not humiliates. And it
brings you closer. It doesn't push you away. It's a
magnetic form of majesty. Now in the human sense, the
Prophet ﷺ had more Jalal than any
other human being, which is why Urwah ibn Mas'ud met
him in Hudaybiyyah as a negotiator. And he saw the
reverence of the companions towards him. So he goes back
to Quraysh and he says, "Listen, I've met the Caesar
of Rome and the Kisra of Persia, and I've never
seen a man more revered by his subjects than this man."
It wasn't that the Prophet ﷺ,
was sitting on a throne or that he was pompous.
He was sitting on the floor and dressed like his
companions. But it's like Amr ibn al-Aas, رضي الله تعالى
عنه, said that if you ask me to describe the Prophet,
صلى الله عليه وسلم, I couldn't. Because as
beautiful as he was, he was so awe-inspiring that he
would look down in his presence. So I could never
look him in the eye. That was the best of men.
But what about the creator of that man? al-Jalil,
the royalty of all royalty, the majesty of all majesty.
And to feel what al-Jalil does to an aware human
heart, there's this beautiful narration from an Imam
al-Asma'i, rahimahullah, where he says that I met this
Bedouin one time in Hajj. And he said to me,
"Can you read me some Quran?" So I read Surah
Adh-Dhariyat until I came to this ayah. "وَفِي السَّمَاءِ رِزْقُكُمْ
وَمَا تُوعَدُونَ" "In the heaven is your sustenance and what
you've been promised." So the man said, "Hasbuk, that's
all I need." And he goes and he slaughters his
camel and he gives everything away in charity, trusting
that his rizq is going to come from his Lord.
Then later at Hajj, an Imam al-Asma'i says, he came
back to me and he said, "Can you read where
you left off?" So I read the next verse. "فَوَرَبِّ
السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ إِنَّهُ لَحَقٌّ" "By the Lord of the heavens and
the earth, indeed this is surely the truth." And the
Bedouin cried out and he said, "Ya SubhanAllah! مَنْ ذَا الَّذِي
أَغْضَبَ الْجَلِيلَ حَتَّى حَلَفَ؟" "Who angered His majesty until He
swore an oath? Did they not believe His word the first
time? Did He really have to swear?" And he
cried out saying the same thing three times until he
was so overwhelmed by Allah's majesty that Allah brought
back his reverent soul. That's al-Jalil, who invokes in
us a reverence that no earthly throne can evoke. So how
does He summon you now? How do you feel when
you stand before Him now? I want you to pay
very close attention to this. Every single day as
the world goes to sleep, in a way that befits
His majesty, He descends to the lowest heaven and He
says, "أنا الملك، أنا الملك، من ذا الذي يدعوني
فأستجيب له؟ من ذا الذي يسألني فأعطيه؟"
"I am the King. I am the King. Who is asking
Me so I may respond to him? Who wants something
from Me so I can give it to him?
Who's seeking forgiveness from Me so that I can
forgive them?" The King opens His door and invites His
subjects in. No guards, no red carpet, no bureaucracy,
no fear. That's every single night an offer to the world
from the King of the heavens and the earth.
Then on that single fateful day when the world ends,
that same King rolls up the heavens and the earth
in His right hand. And He calls out again, "أنا
الملك، أنا الملك، أين الجبارون والمتكبرون؟" "I am the
King. I am the King. Where are the arrogant tyrants
now?" But it's a completely different tone. Contrast the
two proclamations of the King. There's the nightly mercy
call and then there's the Qiyamah majesty call. And if
you answer His nightly call with humility and
repentance, then that day's call will be mercy for you.
But if you ignore Him now, then that day's call
will be judgment. But whether you hear Him or not,
you still belong to Him just like every other one
of His creatures. So why do you think He
created you in
the first place? 
Yah Malik, you are the king of everything I know and hold.
Remind me that nothing I hold is truly mine and
that every rise and fall belongs to Your decree.
Let my gratitude expand with every breath You lend to
me. Yah Maalik, the owner of the day when debts are
paid. Teach me to settle my dues before I meet
You. Keep me honest with what I owe and hopeful
in what You forgive. Yah Maleek, the king whose
command no one can escape. Let Your sovereignty humble
my pride. Make me content under Your rule and protect
me from a rebellious heart that would cause me to fall
out of Your favor. Yah Jaleel, fill my heart with
reverence that draws me near, not fear that drives me
away. Let my awe of You refine me until I
stand before You small, but never
disgraced. 
وَلِلَّهِ الْأَسْمَاءُ الْحُسْنَىٰ فَادْعُوهُ
بِهَا