Adam.
Adam.
Mom... Where are you?
Mom...What happened to you?
What happened to you? 
Mom!
Mom! Mom 
No Mom!
Mom!
Where are you? Oh, God!
Oh, God!
There are names of Allah like As-Samad that are
meant to fill your emptiness. But then there are
names that are made to deal with your restlessness.
You've come to figure out that this world is full
of a lot of noise. And then suddenly the hereafter
doesn't feel that far away anymore. And in some ways
it's become closer to you than the things you used
to cling to. You come to realize that you weren't
created for a life without storms. But you were
given what's needed to find stillness within them.
The chaos of this world is meant to drive you
to the source of peace. And meant to make you
a source of peace. All while you long for the final
destination of peace. وَلَكُمْ فِيهَا مَا تَشْتَهِي
تَشْتَهِي أَنْفُسُكُمْ وَلَكُمْ فِيهَا مَا
تَدَّعُونَ And there you will have whatever your
soul desires and whatever you ask for. But that's
Jannah, where everything is pure and perfect. Here
you need to find peace in His perfection while being
an imperfect being, experiencing an imperfect world.
The scholars say that peace comes from three things:
from knowing Him in His perfection, from trusting
His perfect plan, and from remembering His perfect
reward waiting for you in the next life. But what
you don't want to do is find yourself on the other
side of that plan because you are the one
spreading corruption or robbing someone else of
their peace. Sometimes your first test is not
necessarily to make the world pure, but to remain
pure within it even though you're never going to be
perfect. And that's where three names unfold inseparably:
As-Subbuh, the utterly perfect beyond all
imperfection; Al-Quddus, the entirely pure, who
purifies what He wills; As-Salam, the one who is
peace Himself and the source of any peace to be
found within. When Allah announced the Khilafah of
Adam, an imperfect being on earth, the angels said:
أَتَجْعَلُ فِيهَا مَنْ يُفْسِدُ فِيهَا وَيَسْفِكُ
الدِّمَاءَ"Ya Rabb, will You put on earth those who
spread corruption and spill blood, which is the
opposite of peace?" وَنَحْنُ نُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدِكَ
وَنُقَدِّسُ لَكَ "And we, on the other hand, glorify
Your praises and sanctify You." Meaning we don't
just declare Your perfection, but our worship in
accordance with that perfection is pure. The
scholars explain that when they said: نُقَدِّسُ لَكَ
they meant we offer to You only the purest of deeds
without any shirk or any insincerity. Now look
at the words. Tasbīḥ declares Him free of any
imperfection. Taqdīs declares Him pure of all
contamination. And it purifies Your own deeds for
Him. So for the angels, Tasbīḥ and Taqdīs looks
like this. The Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم said that
the heavens above you are creaking because there
isn't a handspan except that there is an angel
standing, bowing, or prostrating, glorifying Allah
without a break. And when that angel who did nothing
but worship Allah for his entire existence raises
his head on the Day of Judgment, the only thing
he will say is: سُبْحَانَكَ مَا عَبَدْنَاكَ حَقَّ
عِبَادَتِكَ "How perfect are You? We did not worship
You as much as You deserve to be worshiped." That's
the angels. But when you bow and prostrate like the
angels in every Rukūʿ and Sujūd, what are you doing?
You're echoing their words aspirationally: سُبُّوحٌ
قُدُّوسٌ رَبُّ الْمَلَائِكَةِ وَالرُّوحِ Perfect and
pure is the Lord of the angels and the spirit.
And then at the end of Witr, when you pray
that extra prayer beyond obligation, purely out of
love and devotion, when no one else can see you
and you've chosen your devotion over desire, you
say: سُبْحَانَ الْمَلِكِ الْقُدُّوسِ رَبِّ
الْمَلَائِكَةِ وَالرُّوحِ The angels questioned the
favor that Allah was bestowing upon humanity because
of what they already did and didn't know what we
would be capable of. And when we choose devotion
like them, we join them in their worship of tasbīḥ
and taqdīs even though we have what they don't:
shahwah, desire. Tasbīḥ and taqdīs are the acts that
honor Subbūḥ, Quddūs. And think of them as clearing
the way and then filling the void. Subbūḥ means no
flaw can ever be ascribed to Him. Quddūs means no
purity exists except from Him. So between them you
have the intense negation of anything unworthy of
Him and the intense affirmation of every perfection
that belongs to Him. Sibāḥah means to swim. And it
also shares the root word because the swimmer is on
top of the water. So you're declaring Subbūḥ above
all that is attributed to Him. And what did
Yunus 'alayhi s-salam say when he was drowning at the
very bottom of the ocean? لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا أَنْتَ
سُبْحَانَكَ إِنِّي كُنتُ مِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ "There
is no God but You. How perfect are You? I
was amongst the wrongdoers." And Allah says:
فَلَوْلَا أَنَّهُ كَانَ مِنَ الْمُسَبِّحِينَ لَلَبِثَ
فِي بَطْنِهِ إِلَى يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ "Had He not
been amongst those who do Tasbih, then He would have
stayed in the belly of that whale drowning until the
day of judgment." The angel raises his head in the
heavens. SubhanAllah. Yunus 'alayhi s-salam in the
bottom of the ocean. SubhanAllah. Both of them are
declaring Allah is above it all. Think of the whole
world as a deep ocean and Tasbih as the only
way to breathe in it. So that's how you ascend.
But how do you purify yourself after you've stained
yourself with sin? You come to Quddūs, the pure
who makes pure, the holy who makes holy. Ibn
al-Jawzi rahimahullah said Allah called the holy
land of Palestine al-Arḍ al-Muqaddasah because it is
al-Muṭahhirah. It purifies the one who goes to it
from all sin. And Al-Quds is pure and blessed only
by Al-Quddūs Himself. And just as Al-Quddūs
sanctifies places, He can sanctify people too. When
Salman al-Fārisī radiallāhu ta'ālā'anhu was settled
in Persia, his brother in Palestine, Abu Dardā'
radiallāhu'anhu, sent him a letter and he said:
هَلُمَّ إِلَى الْأَرْضِ الْمُقَدَّسَةِ "Come to the
holy land and join me." And Salman responds with a
letter that says: إِنَّ الْأَرْضَ لَا تُقَدِّسُ
أَحَدًا وَإِنَّمَا يُقَدِّسُ الْإِنْسَانَ عَمَلُهُ
"The land itself does not make anyone holy. Rather
the only thing that makes a person holy are his
deeds." You could live in the holiest city on earth
and still have a corrupted heart. You could be the
neighbor of the Haram in Mecca and live your life
in Haram and have no benefit from being where you
are physically because of who you are spiritually.
The place itself doesn't make you holy. The pursuit
of the one who made that place holy does. And when
Allah talks about the holy places in the Qur'an,
it's always in the context of, are you worthy?
When Mūsā 'alayhi s-salām and his people are
told: اُدْخُلُوا الْأَرْضَ الْمُقَدَّسَةَ "Enter the
holy land." And then Bani Isra'īl refuses to do so
because of their spiritual poisons. Allah ends up
banning an entire generation from it, finding them
unworthy of that pure land. And then when Mūsā
himself is about to approach, Al-Quddūs says to him:
إِنِّي أَنَا رَبُّكَ فَاخْلَعْ نَعْلَيْكَ إِنَّكَ
إِنِّي أَنَا رَبُّكَ فَاخْلَعْ نَعْلَيْكَ ۖ إِنَّكَ بِالْوَادِ الْمُقَدَّسِ طُوًى" "Indeed, I am your
Lord, so remove your sandals, for you are about to
enter the sacred valley of Tuwa." So when you
approach Al-Quddūs, you have to come worthy and you
have to come pure physically and spiritually.
Physically, you purify yourself by removing any
impurity from your garment and then making wudū' and
entering into a state of taharah so that you can
pray and read Qur'an and do other acts of worship.
But spiritually, Allah subhanahu wa ta'ālā says:
إِنَّمَا الْمُشْرِكُونَ نَجَسٌ "That there is a
defilement of shirk and other spiritual impurities
that keep a person away from Allah." And that's why
the du'a for spiritual cleansing is this imagery of
laundry. اللَّهُمَّ اغْسِلْ خَطَايَايَ بِالْمَاءِ
وَالثَّلْجِ وَالْبَرَدِ "O Allah, wash away my sins
with water, snow, and hail, just as You purify a
white garment from stains." You need a deep cleansing
to be purified. And just as You wash the body
for prayer, You wash the heart for presence. And
that's why you have Ar-Rūḥ al-Quddūs, the Holy
Spirit, being Jibrīl 'alayhi s-salam, who was
purified by Allah and given a rank that no other
angel holds. His entire being reflects the beauty
and purity of Allah's plan. Jibrīl loves what Allah
loves, and he's the first to find out what Allah
loves. And then he does what Allah commands, and
he's been given the greatest command of the angels
by delivering the revelation without hesitation. And
what do he and the angels descend with on the night
of Laylat al-Qadr upon the believers when
they're standing in their state of worship? Salām,
salām, peace, peace. But who is that peace from?
It's not from them. It's from the one who
sent them. هُوَ اللَّهُ الَّذِي لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا
هُوَ الْمَلِكُ الْقُدُّوسُ السَّلَامُ. As-Salām
is the one who is peace, who gives peace.
He gives peace to the believers, and He is unlimited
in His supply because فَاقِدُ الشَّيْءِ لَا يُعْطِيهِ
"The one who doesn't have something can't give it."
And when we give each other salām, we're getting it
from Him and then extending it to the capacity that
we have. And when we say As-Salāmu 'alaykum to each
other, we're not just saying, "Peace be upon you."
We're saying, "No harm will come to you from me."
And when we call upon As-Salām, we're asking for
peace on the inside and all around us. And when
you live with As-Salām, peace stops depending on
circumstance because the calm within can sustain
you. Notice in your prayer, in your Rukūʿ and your
sujūd, you say: سُبُّوحٌ قُدُّوسٌ. "And where do you
find more peace than those positions in your
prayer?" And then when you close the prayer:
السَّلَامُ عَلَيْكُمْ وَرَحْمَةُ اللَّهِ السَّلَامُ
عَلَيْكُمْ وَرَحْمَةُ اللَّهِ You're not just
greeting angels. You're spreading the peace that you
just received to everything right and left of you.
And then you seal it all with: اللَّهُمَّ أَنْتَ
السَّلَامُ وَمِنْكَ السَّلَامُ تَبَارَكْتَ يَا ذَا
الْجَلَالِ وَالْإِكْرَامِ "O Allah, You are peace,
and from You is peace. Blessed are You, O possessor
of majesty and honor." You return to the source of
peace, and then you become a source of peace. And
the Prophet ﷺ said: أَفْشُوا
السَّلَامَ بَيْنَكُمْ "Spread peace among you."
Those who know as-Salam don't just rest in peace when
they die. They reflect it while they're still alive.
Because salām isn't just a greeting. It's the state
that you carry back from your prayer mat into a
restless world before you return to your eternal
home. وَاللَّهُ يَدْعُو إِلَىٰ دَارِ السَّلَامِ "And all
along, Allah is calling you to the home of peace."
And after the believers greet each other with salām
in this life, and then the angels come to you
and greet you with salām at death, the ultimate calm
is when you hear سلام from السلام Himself.
سَلَامٌ قَوْلًا مِّن رَّبٍّ رَّحِيمٍ "Peace,
a word to you from your loving, merciful Lord." He
greets you with His own names. And it's not just
angels saying it on His behalf anymore. It's Him
saying it to you directly. And Jannah isn't just a
place of reward. It's a reunion with all those whom
you love, including Him. It's where every fracture
in your soul is healed, every anxiety is erased, and
every longing is fulfilled. But He's not just
calling you to a place of peace. He's calling you
to become peace, to carry it in yourself so that by
the time you enter into Dar as-Salām, you won't
be walking into peace for the very first time.
You'll be returning to it, repeating what the angels
who are now all around you have always said from
the beginning: سُبُوْحٌ قُدُّوسٌ رَبُّ
الْمَلَائِكَةِ وَالرُّوحِ "Perfect and pure is the
Lord of the angels and the spirit." But you're not
an angel, and you happen to live in a world
of demons and imperfect beings just like yourself.
And the only way to survive this world is through
the peace that you find in Him.
يَا سُبُّوحُ سُبْحَانَكَ How perfect You are beyond
everything I can imagine. When the world feels loud
and heavy, remind me that You are untouched by its
chaos. Let my glory and praise of You rise above
the darkness, even if I drown myself in it, and pull
me out of it by Your perfection, even after
I dragged myself down. يَا قُدُّوسُ Purify
me inside and out. Cleanse my worship of pride,
my heart of resentment, my soul of anything
that clouds its way back to You, and make
me worthy of the nearness I seek to You.
يَا سَلَامُ Send peace into every storm
within my chest. Let Your calm settle
where fear once lived. Your safety surround
what the world cannot protect. Make me a
source of peace for others until I meet You in
the home of peace and get to hear from You
Yourself. سَلَامٌ وَلِلَّهِ الْأَسْمَاءُ
الْحُسْنَى فَادْعُوهُ
بِهَا.