Not much safer here than Gaza like you and mom said. Yeah.
Uh, that's one crazy racist nutjob with one gun.
Atleast no rockets or tanks.
Whatever. Guns or rockets either way we will die. 
I can't walk.
Let's sit down for a bit. 
"Say Allah is One. 
Slowly. Slowly.
"Allah the Eternal Refuge. He neither begets nor is born..."
"Nor is there to Him any equivalent."
Is that what your Mom taught you?
Well done.
Look who's being a good nephew. 
Take it easy. Are you mad at me?
No, no, no. I'm very happy. 
You took me from my mom
and left me to your "country of the future".
So that I can sit here and watch you die. 
And on top of it all, you couldn't bring
my mom with me and now she is on her own.
I betrayed her and I'm not there to protect her. 
Yusuf.  
Yusuf, is this a joke? 
Yusuf!
Uncle!
Uncle, uncle. 
Yusuf, are you kidding me?
Uncle!
Allah lets you feel empty and dissatisfied with
everything else so that you don't depend too much on
those things. Sins are supposed to make you feel
miserable, and pointless pursuits are meant to make
you feel like something is missing. So your soul
sends signals to you constantly saying, "I'm
incomplete without something greater." One of my
favorite names of Allah, if not my favorite name, is
الصمد. And it's so deep because as you're reading
through Surah Al-Ikhlas, every other ayah is so
self-explanatory, but the name As-Samad is at the
heart of it, and it's a complete mystery to most
Muslims. As-Samad means the one who is whole, not
hollow. He's completely self-sufficient, not
dependent on anything, and he has no spaces or gaps.
So the scholars mentioned that this means he has no
organs inside, and he's not made of parts, so he
can't disintegrate. لم يلد ولم يولد. He doesn't give
birth, nor is he begotten, because he doesn't come
out of anything else, and nothing else goes into him.
And that means he's the perfect refuge for you and
the only thing that can make you feel whole because
he's completely free of need himself. Think of angels
not needing food or drink, but even they're still
created beings that function within some sort of an
ecosystem. As-Samad does not need what needers need,
and nothing is like him or possible without him. Even
his names are so perfectly whole and connected to one
another, and all this makes him the one supreme,
uncompromised refuge. And here's the thing: you were
made to feel empty so that you would run back
to As-Samad, the fulfilling one, because everything
other than him will leave you feeling unfulfilled,
even if it's a blessing, by the way. A job
will give you income, but not necessarily meaning. A
relationship will give you companionship, but not
completion. Fame will give you attention, but not
validation. Wealth will give you comfort, but not
purpose. Every created thing has a limit, and the
moment you reach that limit, you feel it. There's a
void that returns. And then you're frustrated because
you work so hard for something thinking that it would
fulfill you, but it didn't. I want you to think
of this image that projects us in pieces onto Him,
the Whole. When you turn to Him who has no
disintegration, you start feeling yourself fulfilled
and coming together. Life starts making more sense,
and you start connecting dots. And the moment you
turn away from Him, you start falling into pieces
again, and you have no inner peace inside. You're not
feeling fulfilled, and you can't connect the dots.
Which brings me to the next name. Allah is Al-Haqq,
the one who speaks the truth, the one who promises
the truth, but the one who is also truth himself.
Everything connected to him is truth, and everything
disconnected from him is باطل in that it's
meaningless. ألا كل شيء ما خلا الله باطل
Verily, everything pursued other than Allah is vain.
It's like a poetic paraphrase of the ayah in the
Qur'an. كل شيء هالك إلا وجهه Everything will
perish except for His face. And the scholars mentioned
that includes what was done for his sake. So
everything detached from Allah, every false god,
false pursuit, or fleeting joy is باطل in that it's
hollow and temporary. Only things connected to him
have true value. And you want to know that what
you're doing has meaning, that your sacrifices aren't
for nothing, that everything you're going through is
leading you to somewhere. But the dunya deceives by
nature. It's a world of false promises. The degree
doesn't guarantee purpose. The promotion doesn't
guarantee peace. The marriage doesn't guarantee joy.
Everything in this dunya tells you initially, "I'm
enough," and then you realize it really isn't. So
Allah promises you no more emptiness, no more
meaningless pursuits. Just like Al-Hadi rewards
guidance with more guidance, think of Al-Haqq in a
way that connects one truth to the next so that
you're only pursuing things that make sense and have
promising results. Listen to the hadith of the
Prophet ﷺ and think of this like
the truth roadmap. اللهم أنت الحق ووعدك الحق
وقولك الحق ولقاؤك حق والجنة حق والنار
حق والنبيون حق ومحمد ﷺ حق
O Allah, you are the truth, and your promise
is truth, and your word is truth, and your
meeting is truth, and paradise is truth, and the
hellfire is truth, and the prophets are truth, and
Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم is truth. Okay, follow
along. Once you come to know that Allah is true,
that he exists and that he's very real and not
some abstract idea, but the creator who brought you
here with a purpose, then you trust that his promise
is true. Because if he's real, then what he says
will happen is also real. And then that means that
his word is true. So that means every lesson or story
in the Qur'an is not some myth or metaphor,
but it's to point you to an ultimate reality. What's
that ultimate reality? It's you being resurrected and
standing in front of Al-Haqq, where he will ask you
about everything you did. And one of the names of
the Day of Judgment is Al-Haqqah. And so then that
means that his promise of paradise or hellfire after
the Day of Judgment is also true. And then that means
that what the prophets were saying all along
was true. And then they all pointed to the Prophet
صلى الله عليه وسلم as the prophet to come with
a truth that would never be extinguished again. So
Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم was sent in truth. If you
notice, every truth unlocks the next truth and
then puts steam in your pursuit and purpose. But
here's the flip side. The opposite of this is sin.
If the reward of a good deed is that Allah
allows you to do another good deed and then start
connecting dots, then the punishment of a sin is
spiritual claustrophobia. You get stuck in sin. The
path keeps getting narrower, and you feel completely
trapped. And even if it's not sin, but just empty
worldly pursuit, it still feels like you're
suffocating because you have no spiritual oxygen. If
you're living in a mansion but don't know why you're
here, no square footage is going to make you feel
better. So when the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم would
say, "وَوَسِّعْ لِي فِي دَارِي" (grant me expanse in
my home, he didn't mean widen my home. He meant
widen my perspective with barakah and clarity. So
remember Rib'i ibn 'Amir in front of the ruler of
Persia? One of the things he said was, "We're here
to take you "مِنْ ضِيقِ الدُّنْيَا إِلَى سَعَةِ الدُّنْيَا وَالْآخِرَةِ"
from the constriction of this world to the expanse of
this world and the next." So the truth is spiritual
vastness, which brings us to the final name,
Al-Wasi', the vast, the limitless. Allah is vast in
every way. He has no scarcity. He doesn't run out.
The word وسعة in the Arabic language refers to
capacity, how much something can hold. And Allah's
capacity is infinite. No matter how many people call
on him at once, he hears every single voice. No
matter how many people ask him at once, he doesn't
run out of mercy to give us. He also doesn't
run out of patience with us. Everything and everyone
else runs out. You run out of energy. You run
out of patience. You run out of ideas. You get
bored with your blessings. And even if you don't, the
blessings are limited in some way and eventually
expire. But Allah never does. He is the divine
expander. And science will even tell you that the
universe somehow expands every day. That's الواسع,
as الخلاق is still creating. And when you walk to
his door, he expands for you. He expands your
knowledge so you're connecting it all and seeing what
others can't see. He expands your capacity so you can
take on bigger tasks that not everyone else can. He
expands your blessings in ways that you're always
pleased with the little, but you see it as a lot.
Life is never dull with Allah because there's
always more to pursue of his vastness. And the
opposite of someone stuck in the narrow path of sin
is someone addicted to the vastness of good. You
can't get enough of him, and he always has more
to give you. So a student is never satisfied, nor
is a worshiper. But it's not that they're
disappointed. It comes from the excitement of knowing
that Allah's vast ocean never runs out of pearls for
you to collect. And that's another vastness Allah
speaks of, the vastness of his revelation. قُلْ لَوْ
كَانَ الْبَحْرُ مِدَادًا لِّكَلِمَاتِ رَبِّي لَنَفِدَ
الْبَحْرُ قَبْلَ أَن تَنفَدَ كَلِمَاتُ رَبِّي
وَلَوْ جِئْنَا بِمِثْلِهِ مَدَدًا Say, if the ocean
were ink for writing the words of my Lord, the sea
would be exhausted before the words of my Lord
would be exhausted, even if we brought the like of it
as a supplement. Remember the story of Musa and
Al-Khidr? The Prophet ﷺ says that as
they boarded a ship, and Al-Khidr is surprising Musa
عليه السلام with all of his knowledge of Allah's
decree that he was trying to grasp for the first
time, they board the ship and a bird landsright on
the edge of the ship, and it starts to peck
water out of the ocean. Al-Khidr looks to Musa
عليه السلام and says,"Ya Musa, my knowledge and your
knowledge compared to Allah's knowledge is nothing
more than like what this bird just took from the
ocean." Now, the last thing I'll say about this is
that think of how you learn in Ramadan how
restricting yourself actually opens you up to Allah's
vastness. That doesn't mean that the truth doesn't
come with inconvenience. There's no way around that.
Praying Fajr is hard. Lowering your gaze is tough.
Giving up interest and usury might mean a financial
loss. Wearing hijab might mean standing out in ways
that make you uncomfortable. Fasting on a hot day is
exhausting. Praying in public or just five times a
day period is disruptive. So yes, truth restricts
your lower self, but that very restraint opens up a
world that you otherwise could not access. In that
restriction, there's vastness. And you may see people
who appear to be living so happy in their
unrestricted lives, but what if they're actually
empty because the lie, no matter how comfortable,
will always eventually strangle you? And the truth,
no matter how uncomfortable at first, will always
open you up. There are people suffocating in their
mansions, choked by their wealth, trapped by their
liberating sins, and captured by their never
fulfilled or never fulfilling desires. Every
sacrifice you make for Allah is going to have a
higher yield. Everything you give for Him will be
given back to you in more. Every restriction is
temporary and replaced by a promised permanent
reward. That's why the angels say to those who didn't
make Hijrah, أَلَمْ تَكُنْ أَرْضُ اللَّهِ وَاسِعَةً
Wasn't Allah's earth vast? And the Prophet صلى الله
عليه وسلم said, "The true Hijrah is leaving off what
Allah forbade." Wasn't the path of Allah expansive
enough for you to not fall into that narrow pothole
of sin? You don't have to fall into that sin.
There's room to move, room to breathe, room to grow.
And when you do fall, you simply return back to
الصمد for wholeness, to الحق for meaning, and
to الواسع for space to grow again. Return after
tasting the emptiness of sin. And Allah promises that
you'll have a Lord waiting for you to forgive
you once again.
يا صمد, the One who needs nothing while
everything needs you, make me whole by
depending only on you. Fill the hollowness
inside of me until no desire within me
competes with your
glory. يا حق
Make your truth the anchor of my heart and my
guiding path to your light. Let every lie I chase
collapse before your reality, and every truth I seek
lead me to your next promise. Keep me grounded in
what endures and turn my eyes away from what
deceives. يَا وَاسِعُ Expand my heart
to hold more gratitude, my patience to endure
with more grace, and my vision to see
beyond my limits. Let me find expanse in your
vastness when the world around me starts
to feel small. 