My dear Yusuf, I
didn't intend to tell you this now.
I didn't want to pressure you,
but it seems I might not get another chance.
Yusuf, my brother and my support.
I want to entrust you with... with Adam.
Take care of him.
He is stubborn,
but he is a good man.
And smart, kind, generous, and strong.
Take care of him, my brother; be patient with him.
He needs you. He needs you to feel for him,
to feel his pain and his confusion.
You are the one most able to feel for him.
He needs you now in this new stage. I
want you to remind him of how I raised you both. That God
is there. Thank God.
And that God is with the rightful and with the truth.
No matter what happens in the world.
When everybody else is asking, "Is tonight Laylat
al-Qadr?" Our mother Aisha رضي الله عنها teaches
us the right question to ask. She's hearing all these
amazing things about Laylat al-Qadr. خير من ألف شهر It's
better than a thousand months. And in it, every matter
is decreed. And then she's seeing her husband صلى الله
عليه وسلم who already worships like no other every
ordinary night of the year. But now he's doing the
extraordinary even by his standards. His tent is pitched
in the masjid for the entirety of the last ten.
He dips his head into the house for her to comb
his hair and to share a quick loving moment.
Can you imagine how small you would feel seeing all
of that and how insufficient your worship would seem? So
she asks the right question. She says, يا رسول الله ماذا
أقول إذا أدركت هذه الليلة؟ What do I say if I
find myself in this blessed night? And Alhamdulillah,
she asked. Because how many billions have said this du'a
just on the basis of her asking a question so many
of us would have? Our mother was so wonderfully
human in her curiosity and so obviously sincere. And
through her single question, every believer was given
the simplest key to the widest mercy. He didn't give
her a list to memorize or a ladder to climb.
He gave her one name of Allah, one attribute, and one
ask that could make the night worth an entire
lifetime. اللهم إنك عفو تحب العفو فاعف عني
O Allah, You are Al-Afu, the pardoner.
You love to pardon, so pardon me. How simple
and beautiful. He didn't tell her to ask for a
house in Jannah. He taught her a sentence that opens
every other door. There was no need for a long,
complex du'a because Allah doesn't need your poetry. He
wants your piety and your simplicity and your sincerity
in your supplication. And Allah, who has more words than
ink could ever contain, is pleased with just that single
sentence because du'a is meant to be simple. The best
du'a in this world is ربنا آتنا في الدنيا حسنة
وفي الآخرة حسنة وقنا عذاب النار O our Lord, give
us the best of this life and the next and protect
us from the punishment of the fire. Because in
that single du'a, it covers everything. And think about
yourself in the last portion of your tawaf, when you're
going through your list and trying to figure out how
you're going to get all your du'as in, but you're
also fighting through the crowds and the elbows and the
distractions and the noise. And then as you come to
that last wall of the Kaaba, you just seal it
with that simple, comprehensive du'a. Likewise, you seal
your Ramadan with this single, comprehensive du'a. The
best du'a for this spectacular night is so short that
anyone can memorize it and keep repeating it even as
you walk around or even as you're on your way
to the masjid. You could say it all night and nothing
else, and you're good. But you can't internalize
that du'a if you don't internalize the single name in
it. So who is Al-Afuww, the pardoner? And what's the
difference between Al-Afuww and Al-Ghafur and At-Tawwab,
the forgiver and the acceptor of repentance? I want you
to think about two applicants before an employer, one of
them having a clean record and another one who has
a record that still lists the offense, but it says
pardoned. They're not the same in people's eyes. And as
human beings, our capacity is limited because we
forgive, but we rarely forget. And even when we try
our best, the scar remains or the label follows, and
the past somehow keeps coloring the present. So think
about how unforgiving society is to the most reformed
former criminal because he still has a record. What
would you do and what would you give for a
clean slate with Allah? For the ability to completely
start over. Allah is Al-Afuww, and He does not deal
with you like people do. Now, مغفرة is when Allah
covers your sin and shields you from its consequence,
not exposing you in this world nor punishing you for
it in the hereafter, but the trace still remains in
the record as a coverable offense. عفو is even
further beyond that. It means to wipe out and remove
the trace كأنه لم يكن as if it never was.
The Arabs used to describe it as عَفَتِ الرِّيحُ
الأَثَرَ, a wind that sweeps the desert so that not
even a footprint remains. See if Allah was only to
the level of forgiveness we've already mentioned by
giving you a grace period of a few hours to repent
before you sin so that it's not written down,
or bringing in the veil on the day of judgment
so no one else hears Him remind you before He
forgives you anyway, or changing the record in front of
you so that you know that you won't be harmed
anymore. All of this is beyond human capacity. But
Al-'Afu goes even further. عفا means صفح. So He
pardoned all of it altogether. It's not even
on your record anymore. You know, if you can get
someone to fix a speeding ticket so it doesn't even
show up anymore, imagine Allah fixing the sin so it's
completely deleted from your record. And that's why the
ulama say that this is the most comprehensive du'a. And
if a person achieves this level نال الخير كله that he
has achieved all good. Because the Prophet
صلى الله عليه وسلم says that if a person has their sins
wiped out رجعت كيوم ولدتك أمك that you go back
to the day your mother gave birth to you. The score
of your sin is zero. Do you understand the weight
of that? But He doesn't just set you back to zero.
On the same night, He multiplies your good
deeds, writes for you blessed decrees, and He opens for
you doors to success here and Jannah there with one
night and one name that erases all that burdens you
and provides all that delights you. And He says, يُحِبُّ
الْعَفْوَ. He doesn't pardon begrudgingly. He actually loves
to pardon this way. So while the angels are celebrating
and clogging the heavens with سَلَام and the believers are
congregating and sending up their most sincere prayers,
releasing their heaviest burdens, Allah loves it all
more than we do. Just like He's more joyous over
our repentance than we are, even though we need Him
and He doesn't need us. What if I'm still not worthy?
Unlike us, His pardoning doesn't wait for your
perfection or a perfect apology. And He doesn't say, "I
need some time," or "I can forgive, but I can't
forget." تُحِبُّ الْعَفْوَ. It's His joy to let go of what
would break you to keep holding. But He does
call us to mirror that عَفْو in our own lives
as well. And He knows it's hard for us. And that's
why in the story of Abu Bakr رضي الله تعالى
عنه, when he found out that مِسْطَح, his relative,
who he used to give money to, was one of those
that slandered his daughter, our mother, the wife
of the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم Aisha رضي الله
عنها. And the only thing Abu Bakr does is he
says, "I'm no longer going to give him what I used to."
Then Allah سبحانه وتعالى reveals, وَلْيَعْفُوا
وَلْيَصْفَحُوا ۗ أَلَا تُحِبُّونَ أَن يَغْفِرَ اللَّهُ لَكُمْ
Let them pardon and overlook. Don't you love when Allah
pardons you? Go ahead and do it, ya Aba Bakr.
Not because you have to, but because you love to for
your Lord who loves to pardon for you. So Abu
Bakr not only forgave Mistah, he went back to giving
him everything that he used to give him as
if it never happened. That's 'afwa, erasure that not only
cancels punishment but restores relationships. And
here's something that might surprise you. Do you know
that if you follow the Sunnah, you're not actually only
asking العفو for this gift in the last ten nights
of Ramadan, but actually three times a day at least?
When? Abdullah ibn Umar رضي الله تعالى عنهما said
that the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم never abandoned this
du'a every morning and every evening, meaning after Fajr
and after Asr. Every day the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم
would say, اللهم إني أسألك العفو والعافية في
الدنيا والآخرة، اللهم إني أسألك العفو والعافية في
ديني ودنياي وأهلي ومالي، اللهم استر عوراتي
وآمِنْ رَوْعَاتِي وَاحْفَظْنِي مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيَّ وَمِنْ خَلْفِي وَعَنْ
يَمِينِي وَعَنْ شِمَالِي وَمِنْ فَوْقِي وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ أَنْ أُغْتَالَ مِنْ تَحْتِي
O Allah, I ask You for Your pardon and well-being
in my religious affairs and in my worldly
affairs. O Allah, conceal my faults, calm my
fears, and protect me from what is before me and behind
me, from what is to my right and to my left
and from above me. And I seek refuge in You
from being taken unaware from what is beneath me.
What's the significance of asking Allah for العفو
والعافية؟ العفو is to be pardoned from what's in the
past. العافية is to be spared in regards to what's
to come. And العفو is the single Lord who can
grant you both. Because if you truly are pardoned, then
the door to everything else stays open. But you're also
asking for protection from anything that might pull you
down again or afflict you in your health or well-being
in the future. So that's two times a day. What's
the third time that you call upon Allah سبحانه وتعالى
for this gift? The Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم said
that whoever recites the last two verses of Surah
Al-Baqarah at night before they sleep, كَفَتَا, those
two ayahs are enough for him. And the du'a ends
with وَاعْفُ عَنَّا وَاغْفِرْ لَنَا وَارْحَمْنَا
أَنْتَ مَوْلَانَا فَانْصُرْنَا عَلَى الْقَوْمِ
الْكَافِرِينَ So let's break this down. وَاعْفُ عَنَّا
pardon us. وَاغْفِرْ لَنَا forgive us. وَارْحَمْنَا have
mercy on us. And then grant us worldly victory. Did
you notice that you're starting with the loftiest ask
first? Because Allah is inviting you to be ambitious in
your du'a. It's just like when He tells you, when
you ask for Jannah, ask for الفردوس الأعلى, the
highest garden. And when you ask for forgiveness, don't
settle for the small erasure of a single page. Ask
for the sweeping wind that removes every trace. So the
scholars of Tafsir, they break this down in a few ways.
Some of them said, وَاعْفُ عَنَّا means wipe the trace
and open the path. And if we're not worthy
of that highest gift, وَاغْفِرْ لَنَا cover us and
shield us from consequence. And if even that falls short
because of who we are or what we're doing, وَارْحَمْنَا
then at least let Your mercy embrace us as it
encompasses everything else. Other scholars said, with
وَاعْفُ عَنَّا, you're asking Allah to remove the
distance that the sin placed between you and Him.
وَاغْفِرْ لَنَا you're asking Him to cover it from
people so it doesn't harm you in their eyes.
وَارْحَمْنَا you're asking that He continue to show you
mercy going forward so that your future is not defined
by your past. And then comes the ask for worldly
victory because what stops us from true victory except
for the burden of our own sins? When the companions
used to face impossible odds, they didn't count their
numbers. They questioned their hearts. They used to say,
"We only triumph over our enemies by obeying Allah. And
if we disobey Him, then we become like them." And
then their advantage over us is not by their strength,
but by our sins. Victory doesn't come from our weapons.
It comes from our worthiness. And one of the meanings
of فَانْصُرْنَا coming after وَاعْفُ عَنَّا is that what
would victory mean in this world if we ended up
being humiliated in the hereafter? So you ask for the
loftiest first, but the lowest ask is still significant.
And then you count on the spectrum of الرَّحْمَن all
the way to الْعَفُوّ to carry you somewhere in His
all-encompassing mercy. And remember what this means for
you. Settle people's rights in this world to the best
of your ability. Apologize, return, repair.
Because you don't want to meet Allah with a clean
page on one side and then people's claims stacked on
the other. And as you meet this incredible mercy from
this incredible Lord tonight and all other nights,
something changes inside of you. You're no longer
dragging your shame behind you anymore. You're not
letting yesterday define you. You stop introducing
yourself to your own soul as the one who did
that thing. And you start to believe that change is
real because الْعَفُوّ already sees you as the one who
returned, not the one who fell. He's not looking at
the past you can't rewrite. He's looking at the present
you choose and the intention you carry and the effort
you intend to put forth for the future. And He
can even lighten the burden of your memory so that
remorse becomes a door to Him rather than a prison
cell that you sit in. And if He pardons you
as He loves to, then the month that you just
lived won't feel like a closed loop, but a blessed
opening. The page clears and the path clears. You rise
lighter than you thought was possible and higher than
you felt was possible. And you'll also start to
discover that every time you slipped before, there was
wisdom even in that. And your whole story is about
to come together. But in order for you to write
a new chapter,
اللهم إنك عفو تحب العفو فاعف عني
يا عفو erase what I've done in the mercy
that only You can write. Wipe away the traces
of every sin that followed me
into this night until
I stand before You as if I'd never fallen.
Let my shame become the soil from which sincerity grows
and my repentance the rope that pulls me back to You.
You love to pardon, so pardon me completely. Forgive
what I remember and what I forgot, what I've
confessed and what I've concealed. Make my record as
clean as the day You created me and my heart
lighter than it has ever been before. Let me walk
out of this night free of what once chained me,
hopeful in what awaits me and humbled by the Lord
who forgives simply because He loves
to. وَلِلَّهِ الْأَسْمَاءُ
الْحُسْنَىٰ فَادْعُوهُ
بِهَا