Easy on the hold-all,
don't want to leave.
Hey, what are you doing out here? Taking
a break from the Tour de France, what does
it look like I'm doing? My bike is broken, 
my ankle's twisted, and my life is a total
mess. I can't do anything about that messy
life, but I can fix your bike. What,
do you just drive around fixing strangers'
bikes? Cars actually.
Bikes are just a hobby. Hop in.
Wait. Folks call me Archie. What's yours?
Yusuf. It's Yusuf.
Whenever Zechariah entered Mary's room, he would
find she had food. And it wasn't
ordinary. It was out-of-season fruits and things
she shouldn't have. So he finally asks her one
day, "Mary, where is this from?"
She said, "It is from Allah. Allah provides for
whomever He wills without limit."
"He provides to whom He wills without any
measure." As we just finished speaking about
Al-Hasib, who accounts for every atom on Judgment
Day, imagine if He accounted for every breath
we take in this world. We'd all be ruined.
But the Provider himself is generous with His
bounty. So what does Zechariah do? He
doesn't just go and pray, using Mary's
miracle as the pretext for what he's about
to ask. He thanks Allah for all the blessings He
already provided him with. "And I have never been,
my Lord, unhappy in my prayer to You."
My Lord, I have never been disappointed in You.
Because the way Allah provides for us,
in the most ordinary sense, is already a miracle.
And he didn't want a child just for the sake
of a child. He wanted his provision, his child,
to be provision for the faith. It wasn't the gift
itself he sought, but the pleasure of Allah.
When you ask Allah for money or a position,
or whatever it is you are going to ask,
ask Him for something to please Him with,
not just to please yourself. Provision isn't just
some sort of paycheck. It's a relationship to
Allah's name, the Provider. Hatim al-Asamm said,
"I saw all people in doubt
regarding the matter of provision." I saw
everyone around me doubting their provision.
"And I put my trust in Allah." I trusted Allah
because I read that Allah wrote,
There is no creature on earth but that upon
Allah is its provision. There is no creature on earth but
that upon Allah is its provision. And I realized
that I'm one of those creatures. So I stopped
preoccupying myself with what my Lord has already
guaranteed for me. But how does Allah send it? The
difference isn't in the effort. It's in the heart
behind the effort. So you work like it depends on
you, but you rest like it's already written. The
scholars mentioned that rizq arrives through two
streams. First, by your striving. You
polish the resume, you apply yourself, you show up,
you work hard, and the paycheck comes. Second is
rizq by surprise. From where he does not expect. From
places you would have never imagined. Both of them
are from Ar-Razzaq. So you take the means on your
own, but you trust Ar-Razzaq to either bless those
very means or to send you something from somewhere
that you never expected. And the Prophet
said that if you were to trust Allah
as He should be trusted, He would provide for you
just as He provides for the birds. He would provide
for you just as He provides for the birds. They leave
hungry in the morning and return full in the evening.
But notice, the birds fly to their provision. So trust
Allah controls the sky, but you still have to fly.
Because what Allah sends you from the heavens always
has a purpose. In fact, sometimes Ar-Razzaq will
provide to a sinner as a means of inviting them
back to Him. The Prophet said
that there was once a man who went out
at night and he decided that tonight I'm going to
give charity. So he went out secretly and he handed
that money to someone and then he left. And then in
the morning he heard the people saying that last
night someone gave charity to a thief. He said,
"O Allah, all praise is Yours." A thief? So next night
he goes out and he does the same. And then in
the morning he wakes up and the people are
laughing again and they say, "Someone gave money
last night to a rich man." And he said, "O Allah,
all praise is Yours." A rich man? So the third night he
goes out again in the secrecy of the night and he
gives charity. And the next morning the people
are mocking and they say, "Last night someone gave
charity to an adulteress." And he said,
"O Allah, all praise is Yours. A thief, rich, adulteress."
I gave charity to a thief, a rich man, and an
adulteress. So that night he sees a dream. And it's
said to him that as for that thief, perhaps he
will stop stealing because of your charity. And
as for the adulteress, perhaps she will stop her
adultery. And as for the wealthy man, perhaps he
will learn and spend from what Allah has given him.
Al-Razzaq didn't just teach them about charity. He
taught them about Himself. That they don't need to
sin to survive. And for the believer, sometimes
Al-Razzaq provides by withholding. Keeping you from
one thing only to grant you something better in the
hereafter or something different in this life. So He
shuts a door because what's behind it would poison
your heart. And all along you're watching Him give
to someone who seems horrible and asking, "What is
that about?" But don't worry about Allah's
purpose for His provision to someone else. Think
about what He's trying to tell you. And before we
go any further, you need to broaden your perspective
and decouple rizq from money. When we say rizq, most
of us immediately see nothing but numbers and
financial freedom. But that's such a narrow reading
of a generous Lord. Rizq is everything that benefits
you. Your health is rizq. Your family and friends
are rizq. Your time is rizq. And yes, romance
is rizq. And I know I probably shouldn't walk into
that one again, but the Prophet said...
He said about Khadijah,
"I was blessed with her love." Verily her love
was sustenance. And you'll notice Allah sometimes
even allocates spiritual rizq the way He allocates
material rizq. One person is a born Imam. Another,
a born humanitarian. One person can fast. Another
can make Umrah. One person is prone to Tahajjud as
if they have an alarm clock in their heart. Another
person's eyes shed tears the moment the Qur'an
touches their ears. Another person finds generosity
so easy while someone else is a pro at sabr
and just naturally unfazed by everything. Another
person finds forgiveness to be effortless. All of
that is rizq. Imam Malik was urged
by a man to leave off teaching and focus on
worship. And he wrote back to him saying,
"Allah distributed deeds as He distributed rizq."
That verily Allah has distributed deeds
just as He distributed provisions. Some are more
open to prayer while others are more open to
fasting. Some to charity. Some to striving for the
sake of Allah. Some to spreading knowledge. And
spreading knowledge is amongst the best of those
doors. And Allah opened that door for me and I'm
pleased with it. And I hope that we're both upon
Something good. What Allah opened for you is
your rizq. Don't belittle it because it isn't
someone else's. What Allah opened for me is good
for me. Don't belittle it because it's not yours.
Now pause with the name itself. Ar-Razzaq actually
only appears once in the Qur'an. And the way that
Allah introduces it removes every excuse to doubt
Him. Indeed, Allah is the Provider, possessor of
strength, the firm. Verily Allah is the provider, the
possessor of strength, and the stable. Why pair rizq
with strength and stability? Because your heart
checks two things when it seeks a provider. Do they
have enough to give? And will they keep giving? And
Allah answers all of those questions in that same
sentence. When you think you achieved anything on
your own, you are denying Ar-Razzaq. And that's why
after eating any morsel of food you say: Praise be
to Allah who fed me this and provided it for me
without any power or strength from me. All praises be
to Allah who fed me and provided for me without any
power or strength from me. It's a reset button for
you. Reminding yourself that you're not the source.
You're the recipient. And how beautiful when Allah
allows you to not only receive His rizq, but to
become part of it for someone else. And so you
are invited and inspired to check in on a friend
at the right moment. Or cover someone else's bill. Or
feed a complete stranger all while knowing that you
were never the provider, just a vehicle that Allah
honored by letting you deliver the rizq He already
decreed for someone else. And you're receiving a
greater reward in return. One of the salaf once saw
a beggar at his door. And he said, "Welcome,
welcome to the one who is so generous."
"He puts good deeds in our scales. And he only takes
from our world." How amazing that Allah allows you to
participate in His generosity. Remember how we spoke
about how Allah forbids us from sharing in His
kibriya', in His glory and pride? But while He bars
you from that, how amazing is it that Allah invites
you to share in His karam, in His generosity? And
this opens to us the next door. The name Al-Karim,
the generous and the noble. You see in the capacity
of rizq, Ar-Razzaq gives you your share. Al-Karim
shows you how beautifully it's given. He always
gives you more than you could ask for. And He
adds dignity to the delivery by making you feel
dignified and honored by His gift. Karim means one
who is generous in that He gives above what is
due. And it also means one who is noble in
that He honors you beyond what you merit. When
something is described as Kareem, it means it is
noble in itself and generous towards you.
And that is why it is called Al-Qur'an Al-Kareem.
How much has the Qur'an given you? But
your Lord who sent it is even more Kareem. He
is Al-Kareem. He gives before you ask and more
than what you asked for and only in the most
beautiful of ways. And He pairs that Karam with
Ghina, with perfect independence. Whoever is grateful,
it is only for his own soul. And whoever is ungrateful,
then my Lord is Self-Sufficient, Generous.
Whoever is grateful, it is for himself. And whoever
is ungrateful, my Lord is Self-Sufficient, Generous.
True generosity belongs only to one who needs nothing
from you. People give for praise or power. He
gives because He is Al-Kareem. And He gives you
much more than what nourishes your body. He gives
what nourishes your heart and your soul.
Praise be to Allah who honored us with the Qur'an.
Praise be to Allah who honored us with our Prophet.
Praise be to Allah who honored
us with this Qur'an. Who honored us with
this Prophet. Who honored us with this religion.
And He honored the children of Adam. We have honored...
"We have honored the children of Adam" in many ways.
O mankind, what has deceived you
concerning your Lord the generous?
concerning your Lord the generous? But there's one
more graduation in this generosity. From Kareem to
Akram. From generous to the most generous. If
Al-Kareem overwhelms you with what He gives and how
He gives it, Al-Akram just humbles you with why He
gives. Purely because He loves to. You know, I
remember being asked, what's the first name that
Allah revealed to the Prophet?
And obviously there is Rabbika, your Lord.
But specifically, Recite, and your Lord is most generous
Read and your Lord is the most generous. When Allah
first spoke to the Prophet,
He could have begun with any name. But He
chose Al-Akram to let the Prophet
know that whatever He came looking for, He
was going to leave with more. And the Prophet
went up there looking for
inspiration and Allah sent him with more. The
greatest revelation of all time. Glory be to Allah,
look how close these two verses are. What has
deluded you regarding your generous Lord?
Recite, and your Lord...
Recite, and your Lord is the most Generous.
Al-Karim tells you that His nature is giving.
Al-Akram tells you that no one's giving ever
compares to Him. And when Jannah opens
its gates beyond anything you ever imagined and
you're surrounded by everyone who knows that no one
is there because they're deserving, the last man to
enter Jannah comes in. And because of how much Allah
gives him, he thinks Allah is mocking him because of
how little he did. On the other hand, you have
the martyr who would want to come back to this
world for one purpose and one purpose only. To die
again and again for Allah because of what they
witnessed of His karam, of His generosity. So how do
you live with Ar-Razzaq, Al-Karim, Al-Akram?
Remember, you didn't negotiate for a heartbeat
before Fajr. And you don't swipe a card for the sun
to rise. Straighten your theology of asbab, the
means. Your job isn't the source. Your degree isn't
the source. Your talents or smarts are not the
source. They are asbab, means. And the asbab
maker is Allah. And because you know that Ar-Razzaq
has already guaranteed your sustenance, you stop
treating people as threats to your share. What Allah
decreed will be. And what passes by you was never
going to come to you. And in the heaven is your provision
and whatever you are promised. In the heaven is your provision
and what you are promised. You start to instead be
generous yourself and to give not from a place of
scarcity, but from a place of trust. And Allah will
never let you outgive Him. So yes, sometimes His
generosity looks like prevention rather than
delivery. Sometimes Ar-Razzaq provides safety by
closing the same door that you begged Him to open.
Sometimes Al-Karim shields you by delaying what you
thought you needed, but would have chipped away at
your dignity. And sometimes Al-Akram replaces what
you lost with something so much better. But in all
cases, with a beautiful opinion of Allah, you can
finally start to unlock the best version of yourself.
O Provider, You provide for every creature in ways
we cannot see. Feed my heart before my hands.
And let my trust in Your sustenance outweigh
my fear of the future. Provide for me
in ways that bring me closer to You.
And never let what I earn make me forget
who it's from.
O Most Generous, You give beyond what
I deserve. And with a dignity too noble
for me to live up to. Let Your generosity
flow through me as a reflection of how it
flows from You. Make my giving noble
and my gratitude constant. When You withhold,
remind me that You are still giving,
even if in ways I may not yet understand.
O Most Generous, most generous of those who give.
Honor me with contentment in every decree.
Make my share of this world enough and my
portion of the next abundant. Let me live
in gratitude for Your generosity that I can never
live up to.
And die with praise for a Lord who always
gave more. To Allah belong the most beautiful
names, so call upon Him
by them.