So where are you heading anyway?
I'm not sure anymore.
He's in his own movie.
You know? Metal
wears. Parts fail.
But nothing runs forever. But if nothing ever
got broke, and nothing ever got fixed.
Try it now.
You're good to go. Israeli raids and shelling continue
in many areas of the Strip. This morning and noon,
Israeli artillery resumed concentrated shelling on
Israeli occupation deployment areas near the
yellow line east of Gaza City. God is our suffice.
There is no power or strength except with God.
Is Adam alright
Yeah. He barely slept last night.
Poor kid.
the injury of two Palestinians who reached Al-Ahli
Hospital in east Gaza City. In addition to all this,
here in the south of the Strip, specifically in Gaza.
You need to be stronger, but maybe not in the way
that you think. Strength isn't just about you
being okay; it's about being made stable enough to
help someone else stand. Because the Ummah doesn't
just need sincere believers, but strong believers who
can uplift others. But first, just like we decoupled
provision from money, we must decouple strength
from mere muscles. Yes, strength can mean physical
strength, but in our faith it's also the strength of
mind, the strength of heart, the strength of
character, and so many other things: financial
stability, social leverage, mental toughness,
strength under pressure, and the list goes on.
Scholars summarized strength in Islam as three
things: readiness, which is internal willpower,
will, which is the willingness to do things with
it, and the means by which you can do it.
And since I shouted out the Malaysians, my
favorite prayer I learned from the brothers and
sisters in South Africa: May Allah take you from
strength to strength. The Prophet said,
"The strong believer is better and more beloved
to Allah than the weak believer, and in both
is good." The strong believer is better
and more beloved to Allah than the weak believer,
though there is good in both. But he qualified
strength by saying, "The strong one is not the one
who overcomes others physically. The
strong one is the one who controls himself in a
fit of anger." So true strength is when you're able
to spiritually overcome yourself even when your
temper is triggered. And the Prophet said,
"Shall I not teach you a word
from beneath the throne?" That's a treasure of
paradise. He said, say, "There is no power but Allah."
There is no power or strength except by Allah.
Now think about that. Above the throne is
written, "My mercy overcomes my anger." My mercy overcomes
my anger. Beneath it lies, "There is no power but Allah."
There is no power and no strength except
through Allah. Between the mercy above and the
strength beneath, you learn what true power is. You
draw strength not by being overpowering, but by
yielding to the one who holds the throne itself. And
this is the first mention of strength that we come
across in the Qur'an when Allah says to Bani
Israel, "Take what we have given you with strength." Take
what we have given you with strength, meaning hold onto the
covenant and hold it with seriousness and make sure
that you follow through. And the Prophet
was introduced to the Qur'an through a
strong embrace that partially was to strengthen him
for the revelation to come. And Allah told this
Ummah, "And prepare against them whatever you can of
strength." Prepare against them whatever you can of
strength. Show your enemies you're unafraid because
you have the Lord of the Throne and that you're
ready for whatever they throw at you because you seek
refuge in the Lord of the Throne. Whatever you can,
whatever you can means that we all need to plug
into our Ummah's strength. Some of us need to develop
critical skill sets. Some of us need to work on
tools of defense. Some of us need to fortify our
intellects. Some need to protect the bodies of our
physically vulnerable ones. Others need to protect
the hearts of our spiritually vulnerable ones. The
strong Muslim is the one who positions his or her self
to be of the most benefit, to change yourself and
then to change the world around you only by the power
of Allah. Because there is no power or might but His. I
can neither change a situation nor garner any
strength except through Him. That source is Allah's
name, Al-Qawi, the one who possesses all strength.
Because anyone trying to draw strength from
anything or anyone but Him is just one decree away
from collapse. But what does it look like to draw
strength and distribute strength through Al-Qawi? Look
at how the Prophet described Umar
in a dream. He said, "I saw in a dream
that the people had gathered, and then Abu Bakr stood
up and he pulled out one or two buckets full
of water from a well. And there was a weakness
in his pulling, may Allah forgive him. Then Umar
stood up and the bucket turned into a very large one.
And I have never seen any strong man among
the people doing such a hard job. He pulled out
so much water that the people drank to their
satisfaction and even watered their camels to their
fill. And then after quenching their thirst, they sat
beside the water." Umar was so afraid of
the mule testifying against him for not paving roads
in Baghdad that Allah gave him strength due to
his sincerity to be able to pave roads all over
the world. But even Umar, with all of his strength,
with all of his power, if you mentioned to him
to fear Allah Al-Qawiyy, he would tremble in awe of
Allah like a child. So who is Al-Qawiyy, the
All-Strong? Indeed, it is Allah who is
the Provider, possessor of strength, the firm.
Indeed, Allah is the Provider, possessor of strength.
Notice Allah introduces His strength along with
His sustenance. He provides, then He empowers, and
then He stabilizes what He gave. What good is
today's power if tomorrow it crumbles? What good is a
strong moment if it can't become a strong movement?
And that's where the second name comes in, Al-Matin,
the unshakable, the unbreakable. Every human being
has a breaking point. Even the most disciplined
person can buckle at some point. And when our
strength fails, we might feel like we're weak people,
but Allah is Al-Matin, unconquerable, undefeated.
Nothing ever spins out of control for Him, even if it
feels that way for us. He even describes His
plan that way, "And I will give them time. Indeed, My plan
is firm." I give them time. Indeed, My plan is
firm, meaning it's intact even if they think that
they've broken through. Where people see it all
falling apart, He sees it all coming together. Al-Matin
is similar to the land compared to the sea, stable land
versus tossing waves. So you plant your feet in His
strength and you speak through His strength, and you
become a strong shore for others without pretending
to be their savior. He feeds you, then He fortifies
you, then He keeps you from falling apart. And notice
how strength is never praiseworthy in and of
itself. Allah pairs His own strength with benefit. And
this is also true for His creation. Allah calls
Jibril "severe in strength."
So Jibril descends with the revelation that could
crush mountains. And with the tip of a single wing
With one of his 600 wings, he could destroy a nation
like the people of Lut. But Allah
also calls him the Trustworthy Spirit. He has
integrity. His strength is not just for the sake of
it. And for human beings, the same holds true
as well. What do you pair your strength with?
Think of the daughters of Shu'ayb when
they introduced Musa to their father, and
they described him as strong and
trustworthy. Because what did Musa do with his
strength? He fought for the vulnerable strangers,
even though he was most vulnerable at that
moment. Allah didn't just give him physical strength.
Musa was strong-minded and trustworthy,
while the weakest man, Pharaoh, was
pursuing him everywhere. But then Allah crowns
his might with a dignity that only belongs to Him.
He is also the Almighty, whose might is
absolute and whose position is beyond contest.
The one through whom all honor is defined and given.
He is the Almighty, the Praiseworthy.
He is the Almighty whether you like it or not,
and praiseworthy whether you praise Him or not.
The only honor you will ever find in life is
through Him. So He tells you to take from His
Honor, not away from Him, but through Him. "Whoever
desires honor, then to Allah belongs all honor."
Whoever seeks honor, then know that to Allah belongs
all honor. And just like true strength isn't defined
by big empty muscles, true honor isn't defined by big
crowns or gaudy cars and palaces or glamorous gowns
or even by titles or trends. So when Umar
fulfilled the dream of the Prophet
by taking that strength to Jerusalem,
he entered Jerusalem with strength and honor, but
not in the way that they knew honor before. He
was in patchy clothes, and he let his servant ride
on his camel. He wasn't interested in the red carpet.
And even in that glorious moment, he wasn't deluded
by the praise that was being lavished on him or
interested in pandering to anyone else's sense of
power. He says then, "We are a people whom
Allah honored through Islam, and if we seek
honor through anything else, Allah will humble us."
We are a people whom Allah honored through Islam.
And if we seek honor through anything else, then
Allah will surely humiliate us. And that honor
wasn't just found after they liberated Jerusalem,
even under the boots of oppressors. Ibn Mas'ud
said, "We have remained honored since..."
"Umar became Muslim." We have remained dignified since
the day that 'Umar became Muslim. From the moment
they walked out in protest in Makkah to the moment
of the opening of Al-Aqsa, they carried a different
type of power, dignity rooted in the Almighty.
The people of Gaza are a people of dignity even
amidst their destruction. They're still the most
honorable people on earth, and they will be honored
with the liberation of Palestine, God willing,
because their dignity is otherworldly, and ours
must be as well. People seek power for position,
and sometimes they abandon the power of values and
integrity for the appearance of strength. They become
slaves to position and pompous displays because
they're actually insecure and weak. They need the
crown on their head or the crowd to clap so that
they can feel big. There's no dignity in that. Real
power isn't in what you own. It's in who
owns you. For us, that's the Almighty, and we're
honored only through Him. And just like we're not
slaves to our enemies because of our dignity, we're
not slaves to our own egos. And that's when you
know it's for God, when the same dignity that allows
you to stand tall allows you to stand down. The
Prophet said, "And God does not increase..."
"...a servant with pardon except in honor." And Allah
does not increase a servant in humility or pardon or
forgiveness except that He increases him in honor.
Your honor grows when you choose forgiveness over
vengeance. Your rank only rises when your head bows
only to Him and you shed your ego for His
sake in the same way that your strength expands
when you use it for His sake. And if the world
has convinced you that you must be loud and make
a scene to be strong, flip that script.
The Qur'an preserves honor for the believer
even when materially weak because honor is
in spiritual gravity, not in social status. "And
honor belongs to Allah, His Messenger, and believers."
And honor belongs to Allah and His Messenger and the
believers. You don't have to bark like a dog to be
seen and heard by people as weak as you.
You just have to bear truth to a noble mission,
to be seen and heard by the only one who
gives true strength and honor. The Strong is enough
to sustain you. The Firm is enough to depend on.
And the Almighty is high enough to honor you beyond
what any human could ever bestow upon you. So honor
yourself with the qualities He loves, and He will
grant you what you love. So ask Him to make
Strong without being harsh, firm without being
rigid, mighty without being arrogant, but instead a
refuge that people can lean on, not a boulder they
hope not to crash into. Because even the strongest
and proudest die, and we all return back to
Him. O All-Strong.
Strengthen me where I am weak and make me firm
where I bend too easily. Lift me so that I
can lift others without ever believing I lifted
myself. When the weight of the world feels heavier
than my faith, remind me that Your strength is the
only way to see through it. Let me draw strength
from Your power, but never be weakened by my pride.
O All-Firm, make me steady when everything else
shakes. Root me in conviction that does not sway with
opinion or fear.
Let my faith be anchored deep enough so that no
loss can uproot it. Keep my footing secure in moments
that test my balance. O All-Mighty, grant me honor
that comes only from You. Let my dignity rest
in humility before You. My worth be measured only in
worship of You. Protect me from chasing validation
from those as fragile as I and make my highest
victory the achievement of Your
pleasure. To Allah belong the best names, so call Him.
Allah has the most beautiful names, so call Him
by them.