When are you going to do a series on


Allah's names? This has been the


question that I've been asked ever since


we started doing the Ramadan series. And


if you followed along our Ramadan series


over the years, you'll notice that we've


taken every article of faith and we've


given a richer and [music] more


practical dimension to it. So, for


example, when we started talking about


Allah subhana wa ta'ala, the series was


Allah loves what does he love to see


from you? And then we did angels in your


presence and you meeting Muhammad


sallallahu alaihi wasallam. of course


Quran 30 for30 and day of judgment the


deeds that light the way for you and


then Jenna how you get there and what


you can expect to experience for the


very specific things that you do and


then we had the webinar on hellfire and


then why me for and


then we did the bar the other side as


we've entered [music] into this deeply


painful moment of the genocide in so


when I did Allah loves years ago I


remember thinking should I do Allah's


names or should I do Allah loves? And I


thought there's no way to be able to


summarize the names of Allah in a


Ramadan series. And I still believe that


today. But here's what we did much


differently. Alhamdulillah. There are


multiple works on the names of Allah.


And all of those works, whether they're


classical or contemporary, contain so


much richness of how to connect to those


names. So whether you're talking about


entire collections like the one from


or


just picking up from the im who spoke


beautifully about the names of Allah


when he comes across the ayat in which


they are mentioned or


who is cited heavily throughout the


series. The reflections are so deep and


plentiful and even in the contemporary


sense there are multiple books and


series [music] in English and they are


all lovely and impactful and profound


and inshallah you can benefit from them.


But what do we do different in this


series? There's this thought that the


names of Allah are so distant and you


know every name you come across it's


like Allah is [music]


so awesome and I am nothing and it can


almost feel redundant. that the prophet


sallallahu alaihi wasallam taught about


the amazing unseen God and his unseen


names and attributes through the very


seen and experienced situations around


you. So the woman that picks up her


child after a battle, he uses that scene


sallallahu alaihi wasallam to teach


about Allah's mercy. So what better way


to connect to the unseen awesome God


except through the seen signs that he


put all around you and Allah


tells us


if you want richness in your


supplication you call upon Allahh with


these names but there's something else


that I want you to note with these names


number one there are incredibly


different circumstances around the world


that everybody has a person in Gaza or


Sudan connects to these names very


differently than you do. But it's the


same names that universally transcend.


And this series,


we're actually going to have those


dimensions of the current time match to


our circumstances so that we can see the


universality of Allah's names and how


applicable they are to every single


situation. The other thing that we're


going to do is we're going to take names


that sound extremely similar and we're


going to focus on the subtleties of the


differences and through that we'll


extract multiple practical applications


for us. This is going to be a road map


of Allah's names, the doors that take us


to that single reality. And the beauty


of Islam is that the simplicity of is


not compromised by these plentiful


names. There is no one who thought that


Alman


and so on mean different gods. They all


unlock this beautiful unambiguous


profound reality of Allah himself. And


if you think about how beautiful that is


that people don't even know what or who


God is in Islam, we know exactly who he


is and he is one but with all of these


clear names and with direct access to


him. I can guarantee you inshallah tala


that by the end of the series [music]


you're going to come out transformed


you and everyone else that you know if


you pay attention and the goal is to


actually provoke a deeper study of


Allah's names usually in the past when I


do a Ramadan series [music] I have to


extrapolate you know I take a topic and


I take something very specific about


that topic and extrapolate this is the


first time that a topic is so vast that


I have to condense and condense and


condense


And so I promise you that we tried to do


as much as we could with the limited


time that we have. But the goal is not


for you to learn everything about


Allah's names here, but to learn enough


to deeply connect to him [music] and to


call out to him and to make you want to


study more and experience more and learn


more and worship more. I truly look


forward to this journey with you [music]


and I ask you to make dua for all of us


because this was not a small effort. It


took multiple people to put this


together and the story playing out in


the background is not one that you'll be


able to take your eyes off of. This is a


deep story that inshallah will come


together as we hope to all come together


when we learn these perfect names and


attributes


and an early Ramadan.