Adam! Where'd
he go? Adam!
شو بتسوي هلقيت؟ لازم نخلي بسرعة، يلا قومي! وين 
بدك تخليني؟ في قرنة قريبة لدار خالي لازم نخلي عليها،
يلا بسرعة قومي! ما بديش أثقل عليكم! ثقلك على الأرض يا
أختي، يلا قومي قومي! قومي! يلا!
صحيتي لحالك ولا معك حدا؟
يلا هيه هيه! Adam!
Didn't I tell you to stay in the car?
يلا let's go، قوم! تخلّينيش أظل أعيد الحكي؟
يلا let's go، قوم!
ولك بقول لك... يلا قوم let's go! تغلنيش! Hey!
Take it easy! What are you doing, man?  
None of your business, old man! 
I'm talking to you!
Listen, he's my nephew, he's just a little... stubborn,
that's all. 
Answer me, boy. Do you know this man?
ولك قله إشي مالك؟ What are you saying?
And where are you from anyway? 
 I'm... we're
from Jerusalem. I'm his uncle, maybe he just didn't
understand the language or something. Jerusalem, huh?
One more time. Do you know this man? 
 Yes!
I actually did
understand the language.
He doesn't like you much, does he?
Well, neither do I.
الرَّحْمَنُ عَلَّمَ الْقُرْآنَ خَلَقَ الْإِنْسَانَ The Most Merciful.
He taught the Qur'an, He created man. You see, before
He even made you, He gave you a very specific
way to know Him. 
Think about how much first impressions matter. 
 What are the first few words at the top
of your profile? Because those few words tell the whole
world what you want to be known as and known for.
And 113 surahs in the Qur'an begin with this
header from Allah Himself  بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ
الرَّحِيمِ 
 And even before the Qur'an was revealed to us
Suleiman عليه السلام introduces Allah this way to a
pagan queen and nation إِنَّهُ مِنْ سُلَيْمَانِ
وَإِنَّهُ بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ Verily,
it is from Suleiman, and it begins in the name
of Allah, the Entirely Merciful, the Especially Merciful.
Out of all of His names, He chose Ar-Rahman
and Ar-Rahim because mercy is the first door to get
to know Him. 
 And before even Suleiman wrote it in
his letter, it was written by Allah above the throne
إِنَّ رَحْمَتِي غَلَبَتْ غَضَبِي Verily, My mercy
prevails over My wrath. 
And you'll notice that the only
name that Allah pairs with His throne is الرَّحْمَٰنِ
الرَّحْمَٰنُ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ اسْتَوَىٰ It's as if to say
that His mercy is the governing principle of everything
beneath His throne, which serves as the roof of all
of creation. So what does that functionally mean? Ibn
al-Qayyim رحمه الله said it means He made forgiveness
more beloved to Him than vengeance. وَالرَّحْمَةُ أَحَبُّ
إِلَيْهِ مِنَ الْعُقُوبَةِ and mercy, more beloved to
Him than punishment; and grace, more beloved to Him than
justice; and giving, more beloved to Him than
withholding. So He framed His entire creation with His
mercy. And then not only that, His mercy frames all
of His other names and attributes. 
Ar-Rahman can be added to every 
other name because He's merciful with His
knowledge. He's merciful with His sight. He's merciful
with His power. So He introduces Himself as Ar-Rahman
before الْعَزِيزُ الْجَبَّارُ الْقَهَّارُ. 
Because even when His might 
shows, He never stops being the Most Merciful. 
And after He wrote mercy on Himself and then into the scheme
of the cosmos, He then programmed it into our
very creation. When the soul of Adam عليه السلام entered
his body for the very first time, he sneezed. And
the very first words he heard from his Lord, يَرْحَمُكَ   
يَرْحَمُكَ اللَّهُ. "May Allah have mercy on you." So mercy was
humanity's welcome into existence. And then before He
sent us to Earth, Allah سبحانه وتعالى created these
sacred bonds of families from the throne. And He hung
them and He said, "I am the Most Merciful, and I
created the sacred ties of the womb." 
Then He placed you in that womb, which He calls الرَّحِم,
because it's derived from His رحمة. It's a sanctuary of
mercy where every single one of your needs is being
met without you having to do anything for yourself. 
Your  mother gives you everything she's got to sustain you
with nothing in return from you. It's the selfless,
one-sided love that's the closest thing that reflects
Allah's mercy on His creation. 
And then you come out of the 
womb into this world, and Allah immediately and
perpetually surrounds you with a mercy that encompasses
everything. And the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم said,
"Verily, Allah created 100 portions of mercy,
And he sent down to this Earth just one of those portions."
Through that 1% of mercy, the entire world is sustained.
And it includes the entirety of mercy that creation is
capable of showing to each other, whether it's human
beings, jinn, or even animals. I want you to imagine
the ocean's depth, 35,000 feet down, which by the way
is the same altitude that your plane flies at.
And in the darkness of that ocean, there's a fish
that's cleaning the parasites off of another fish while
Allah is adjusting the temperature of the water itself.
And then in the height of the open sky, a bird
is signaling danger to another bird while all along
مَا يُمْسِكُهُنَّ إِلَّا الرَّحْمَٰنُ No one is holding
them up except for the Most Merciful. Then think about
your own life and every interaction of mercy that  
ever known, whether it was your mother's embrace or
maybe a friend's forgiveness or even the random act of
kindness from a stranger. All of that is from one
drop of Allah's mercy. But then someone says, "Well, why
is there still so much cruelty on Earth?" And it's
for the same reason that hunger exists in a world
that's overflowing with food, not because we have a
shortage, but because we fail to share. We're not short
of Allah's mercy. We're short of the mirrors to reflect
that mercy. Allah sent 1% of mercy to this Earth,
and we're supposed to be the trustees of that mercy.
And where the trustees fail, Allah سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَى stores
the debt for the day where He saved the remaining
99 portions of His mercy to be dispersed. And still,
look around, even in the midst of the worst human
cruelty that we see, His mercy keeps manifesting. What
more powerful imagery than the famous story of a mother
who runs between swords to pick up her child after
battle? Then she holds that baby tight and she starts
to nurse him. And the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم
captured the moment and he says to the companions, 
See that mom with her baby? Allah is more merciful to you
than she is to that child." You know why 
Because the one who created the mother's mercy is
certainly more merciful than her. Her love is just a
tiny drop of His mercy. And that's why Hammad ibn
Salama said to Sufyan al-Thawri, "Wallahi, if I had to
choose between my parents or Allah judging me on the Day
of Judgment, I would choose Allah because He is
even more merciful to me than my parents." Then someone
says, "Wait a minute, then how come that merciful Lord
does throw people into Hell?" Because Allah is not
limited in His mercy or by His mercy. Even that mother
on the Day of Judgment would flee from her
child at some point out of fear for herself. And His
mercy doesn't cancel His justice. Think about
it. Wouldn't it be cruel to the victims in
Gaza and Sudan and elsewhere if the oppressor and the
oppressed were treated the exact same way? So no, Allah
is not going to treat them the same, not because His
mercy is limited, but because it's perfect. So when
someone says, "How can a merciful God throw people into
hell?" respond and say, "Why would people choose hell
over a merciful God?" As Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz
رحمه الله said, لَقَدْ خَابَ وَخَسِرَ مَنْ خَرَجَ عَنْ
رَحْمَةِ اللَّهِ الَّتِي وَسِعَتْ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ 
Verily, only a loser misses out on the mercy of Allah
that encompasses all things. Like, how bad do you have
to be to be punished by Ar-Rahman? And that's why
Ibrahim عليه السلام said to his father, يَا أَبَتِي
إِنِّي أَخَافُ أَنْ يَمَسَّكَ عَذَابٌ مِنَ الرَّحْمَٰنِ
I'm afraid you're going to be punished by Ar-Rahman.
He didn't say Al-Jabbar. He used the name Ar-Rahman to
say to get to a point where you're punished even
by Ar-Rahman is a scary spiritual place. And you know
who's in that place? إِنَّ الشَّيْطَانَ كَانَ
لِلرَّحْمَٰنِ عَصِيًّا Verily, the Shaytan was
disobedient to Ar-Rahman, a Lord so merciful to him.
And SubhanAllah, Al-Harith ibn Suwayd, he says that at
some point on the Day of Judgment, even that Shaytan
himself will prop his neck up and look up, hoping
that the mercy of Allah will reach him despite all
the evil that he's done. But he's disqualified himself.
So if that's how much mercy Allah has to where
even the worst disbeliever would still think he has a
chance, then how do you think Allah will treat His
believers on the Day of Judgment? And that's when you
get to encounter another layer of mercy, but this time
from الرَّحِيمِ, where the 99% of His mercy is
reserved for you. You see, الرَّحْمَٰنِ is the entirely
merciful. الرَّحِيمِ is the especially merciful.
الرَّحْمَٰنِ pours His mercy all over creation in this
dunya. Then الرَّحِيمِ personalizes that mercy for the
believers in the hereafter. While الرَّحْمَٰنِ is for
the deserving and the undeserving, الرَّحِيمِ is
exclusively for the righteous. وَكَانَ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ
رَحِيمًا And He is Rahim to the believers. الرَّحْمَٰنِ
is mentioned in the Qur'an 57 times. الرَّحِيمِ
114 times, exactly twice that, as if to say الرَّحْمَٰنِ
is for all creation. الرَّحِيمِ doubles the mercy for
those who believe. And He does so when they want
and need it most in the hereafter, where they can
enjoy it forever. But someone might say, "Is there a
special exclusive mercy for the believer in this life as
well?" And the answer is yes. And that is the meaning
of His name, الرَّؤُوفِ, the tenderly merciful.
The scholars say that رَأْفَة is the highest form of
mercy in the Arabic language. And الرَّؤُوفِ has a
special care for the believers even while they're still
here. The scholors say رحمه الله تعالى explained that رَأْفَة
is when Allah protects you before you even know you
needed protection. Like a parent who places a coat on
a child before the cold sets in. It's Allah averting
something from hitting you or maybe making you miss a
turn so that you don't turn into something that would
have hurt you. It's the small things that are happening
inside your body or maybe in the environment around you
to make things pleasant for you with processes you have
no idea are even happening. It's the highest intensity
of mercy, but it operates silently in the background out
of Allah's love for the believer. الرؤوف has a
different layer of mercy in the hereafter for you.
الرؤوف has a deeper layer of mercy for you even
while you're still here. He is رؤوف with His decree
in this life and رحيم with His reward in the next.
There's the mercy that guards before and the mercy
that heals after. And that's why almost every time the
name الرؤوف is mentioned in the Qur'an, it's paired
with الرحيم. Now, how much you're going to receive
of any of these names depends on how much you're
going to reflect of those names. الراحمون
يرحمهم الرحمن. The merciful will be shown
mercy by الرحمن. And if you want more mercy, then
Ibn al-Qayyim رحمه الله says that the nearest to Allah
are those who combine the traits of رؤوف and
رحيم. So look at the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم,
رحمة للعالمين. He was sent as a mercy to the
worlds, but then he was described as
بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ رَؤُوفٌ رَحِيمٌ, uniquely tender and
merciful to the believers. Reflect of Allah's
mercy what you want of it. Mercy surrounded
you before you could even speak. So speak with
mercy and act with mercy and beg for His mercy.
Thank الرَّؤُوفِ for the mercies you never even
noticed and ask الرَّحِيمِ for the mercies you can't
even yet imagine. And then when all that fails, resort
back to الرَّحْمَٰنِ. There's this beautiful story of a
man that was appealing to Allah's mercy after feeling so
unworthy and so beautiful. He makes this du'a and he
says, يَا رَبَّ, O my Lord, You say, فَمَنْ تَابَ
مِنْ بَعْدِ ظُلْمِهِ وَأَصْلَحَ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ يَتُوبُ
عَلَيْهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ, that whoever
repents after his wrongdoing, Allah accepts his
repentance and Allah is forgiving and merciful. And here
I am repenting for my wrongdoing. So Ya Allah,
ارْحَمْنِي. So, O my Lord, ارْحَمْنِي, have mercy on me.
And if you don't find me worthy of that category,
well, You say, Ya Allah, وَكَانَ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ
رَحِيمًا, that You are especially merciful to the
believers. And Ya Rabb, أَنَا مُؤْمِنٌ, I am a believer,
ارْحَمْنِي, so have mercy on me. And if you don't
find me to fit in that category either, well, You
say, Ya Allah, وَرَحْمَتِي وَسِعَتْ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ, and my
mercy encompasses all things. وَأَنَا شَيْءٌ, and I am
something. فَرْحَمْنِي, so have mercy on me. And if I
fail to even achieve that, meaning I'm a nobody, I'm
nothing, then what a tragedy it is. But Ya Allah,
You said, الَّذِينَ إِذَا أَصَابَتْهُمْ مُصِيبَةٌ
قَالُوا إِنَّا لِلَّهِ وَإِنَّا إِلَيْهِ رَاجِعُونَۖ
أُولَٰئِكَ عَلَيْهِمْ صَلَوَاتٌ مِنْ رَبِّهِمْ
وَرَحْمَةٌ, those who when afflicted with a tragedy say,
"We belong to Allah and to Him we return. We
send upon them the blessings of their Lord and His
mercy." So here I am saying, إِنَّا لِلَّهِ وَإِنَّا
إِلَيْهِ رَاجِعُونَ, فَرْحَمْنِي, so have mercy on me. You
see, dear brothers and sisters, mercy is not Allah's
mood. It's His constant nature. And wherever you are right
now, it's not out of your reach because you are
something and His mercy encompasses
everything. 
Yah Rahman, Your throne You wrote mercy upon Yourself.
You were merciful before there was anyone to receive
mercy. Embrace every part of me with that mercy,
my past with its scars, my present with its needs,
my future with its uncertainty.
Ya Rahim, let me taste the mercy
You keep for those who return.
Reward me with the mercy I have yet to know
and raise me to the highest place in Paradise despite
my lows. Ya Ra'uf, cover me from storms
I don't see coming. Mend me
before I break.
Spare me from trials of every kind. Let Your mercy
reach me in ways I'll only understand when
I finally meet
You. 
 